JOHN VON NEUMANN 



We do not erect statues of great scientists. Instead, the 
American Mathematical Society publishes this volume as 
a memorial to John von Neumann. Some of his friends 
describe his brilliant mind, his warm personality, his 
work which will live on in mathematics and in the other 
sciences to which he has contributed so much. 



CONTENTS 

John von Neumann, 1903-1957 1 

By S. ULAM 

Von Neumann and Lattice Theory 50 

By GARRETT BIRKHOFF 

Theory of Operators, Part I. Single Operators 57 

By F. J. MURRAY 

Theory of Operators, Part II. Operator Algebras 61 

By RICHARD V. KADISON 

Von Neumann on Measure and Ergodic Theory 86 

By PAUL R. HALMOS 

Von Neumann s Contributions to Quantum Theory 95 

By LEON VAN HOVE 

John von Neumann s Work in the Theory of Games and Mathe 
matical Economics 100 

By H. W. KUHN and A. W. TUCKER 

Von Neumann s Contributions to Automata Theory 123 

By CLAUDE E. SHANNON 



JOHN VON NEUMANN 
1903-1957 

S. ULAM 

In John von Neumann s death on February 8, 1957, the world of 
mathematics lost a most original, penetrating, and versatile mind. 
Science suffered the loss of a universal intellect and a unique inter 
preter of mathematics, who could bring the latest (and develop latent) 
applications of its methods to bear on problems of physics, astron 
omy, biology, and the new technology. Many eminent voices have 
already described and praised his contributions. It is my aim to add 
here a brief account of his life and of his work from a background of 
personal acquaintance and friendship extending over a period of 25 
years. 

* * * 

John von Neumann (Johnny, as he was universally known in this 
country), the eldest of three boys, was born on December 28, 1903, 
in Budapest, Hungary, at that time part of the Austro-Hungarian 
empire. His family was well-to-do; his father, Max von Neumann, 
was a banker. As a small child, he was educated privately. In 1914, 
at the outbreak of the First World War, he was ten years old and 
entered the gymnasium. 

Budapest, in the period of the two decades around the First World 
War, proved to be an exceptionally fertile breeding ground for scien 
tific talent. It will be left to historians of science to discover and ex 
plain the conditions which catalyzed the emergence of so many bril 
liant individuals ( their names abound in the annals of mathe 
matics and physics of the present time). Johnny was probably the 
most brilliant star in this constellation of scientists. When asked 
about his own opinion on what contributed to this statistically un 
likely phenomenon, he would say that it was a coincidence of some 
cultural factors which he could not make precise: an external pres 
sure on the whole society of this part of Central Europe, a subcon 
scious feeling of extreme insecurity in individuals, and the necessity 
of producing the unusual or facing extinction. The First World War 
had shattered the existing economic and social patterns. Budapest, 
formerly the second capital of the Austro-Hungarian empire, was 
now the principal town of a small country. It became obvious to 

Received by the editors February 8, 1958. 




2 S. ULAM 

many scientists that they would have to emigrate and find a living 
elsewhere in less restricted and provincial surroundings. 

According to Fellner, 1 who was a classmate of his, Johnny s unusual 
abilities came to the attention of an early teacher (Laslo Ratz). He 
expressed to Johnny s father the opinion that it would be nonsensical 
to teach Johnny school mathematics in the conventional way, and 
they agreed that he should be privately coached in mathematics. 
Thus, under the guidance of Professor Kiirschak and the tutoring 
of Fekete, then an assistant at the University of Budapest, he learned 
about the problems of mathematics. When he passed his "matura" in 
1921, he was already recognized a professional mathematician. His 
first paper, a note with Fekete, was composed while he was not yet 
18. During the next four years, Johnny was registered at the Uni 
versity of Budapest as a student of mathematics, but he spent most 
of his time in Zurich at the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule, 
where he obtained an undergraduate degree of "Diplomingenieur in 
Chemie," and in Berlin. He would appear at the end of each semester 
at the University of Budapest to pass his course examinations (with 
out having attended the courses, which was somewhat irregular). 
He received his doctorate in mathematics in Budapest at about the 
same time as his chemistry degree in Zurich. While in Zurich, he 
spent much of his spare time working on mathematical problems, 
writing for publication, and corresponding with mathematicians. He 
had contacts with Weyl and Polya, both of whom were in Zurich. 
At one time, Weyl left Zurich for a short period, and Johnny took 
over his course for that period. 

It should be noted that, on the whole, precocity in original mathe 
matical work was not uncommon in Europe. Compared to the United 
States, there seems to be a difference of at least two or three years in 
specialized education, due perhaps to a more intensive schooling sys 
tem during the gymnasium and college years. However, Johnny was 
exceptional even among the youthful prodigies. His original work 
began even in his student days, and in 1927, he became a Privat 
Dozent at the University of Berlin. He held this position for three 
years until 1929, and during that time, became well-known to the 
mathematicians of the world through his publications in set theory, 
algebra, and quantum theory. I remember that in 1927, when he 
came to Lwow (in Poland) to attend a congress of mathematicians, 
his work in foundations of mathematics and set theory was already 
famous. This was already mentioned to us, a group of students, as 
an example of the work of a youthful genius. 

1 This information was communicated by Fellner in a letter recalling Johnny s 
early studies. 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 3 

In 1929, he transferred to the University of Hamburg, also as a 
Privat-Dozent, and in 1930, he came to this country for the first 
time as a visiting lecturer at Princeton University. I remember 
Johnny telling me that even though the number of existing and pro 
spective vacancies in German universities was extremely small, most 
of the two or three score Dozents counted on a professorship in the 
near future. With his typically rational approach, Johnny computed 
that the expected number of professorial appointments within three 
years was three, the number of Dozents was 40 ! He also felt that the 
coming political events would make intellectual work very difficult. 

He accepted a visiting professorship at Princeton in 1930, lectur 
ing for part of the academic year and returning to Europe in the 
summers. He became a permanent professor at the University in 
1931 and held this position until 1933 when he was invited to join 
the Institute for Advanced Study as a professor, the youngest mem 
ber of its permanent faculty. 

Johnny married Marietta Kovesi in 1930. His daughter, Marina, 
was born in Princeton in 1935. In the early years of the Institute, a 
visitor from Europe found a wonderfully informal and yet intense 
scientific atmosphere. The Institute professors had their offices at 
Fine Hall (part of Princeton University), and in the Institute and 
the University departments a galaxy of celebrities was included in 
what quite possibly constituted one of the greatest concentrations of 
brains in mathematics and physics at any time and place. 

It was upon Johnny s invitation that I visited this country for the 
first time at the end of 1935. Professor Veblen and his wife were 
responsible for the pleasant social atmosphere, and I found that the 
von Neumann s (and Alexander s) houses were the scenes of almost 
constant gatherings. These were the years of the depression, but the 
Institute managed to give to a considerable number of both native 
and visiting mathematicians a relatively carefree existence. 

Johnny s first marriage terminated in divorce. In 1938, he re 
married during a summer visit to Budapest and brought back to 
Princeton his second wife, Klara Dan. His home continued to be a 
gathering place for scientists. His friends will remember the in 
exhaustible hospitality and the atmosphere of intelligence and wit one 
found there. Klari von Neumann later became one of the first coders 
of mathematical problems for electronic computing machines, an art 
to which she brought some of its early skills. 

With the beginning of the war in Europe, Johnny s activities out 
side the Institute started to multiply. A list of his positions, organ 
izational memberships, etc., will be found at the end of this article. 
This mere enumeration gives an idea of the enormous amount of work 



4 S. ULAM 

Johnny was performing for various scientific projects in and out of 
the government. 

In October, 1954, he was named by presidential appointment as a 
member of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. He left 
Princeton on a leave of absence and discontinued all commitments 
with the exception of the chairmanship of the ICBM Committee. 
Admiral Strauss, chairman of the Commission and a friend of Johnny s 
for many years, suggested this nomination as soon as a vacancy oc 
curred. Of Johnny s brief period of active service on the Commission, 
he writes: 

u During the period between the date of his confirmation and the late autumn, 1955, 
Johnny functioned magnificently. He had the invaluable faculty of being able to take the 
most difficult problem, separate it into its components, whereupon everything looked 
brilliantly simple, and all of us wondered why we had not been able to see through to the 
answer as clearly as it was possible for him to do. In this way, he enormously facilitated 
the work of the Atomic Energy Commission." 

Johnny, whose health had always been excellent, began to look 
very fatigued in 1954. In the summer of 1955, the first symptoms of a 
fatal disease were discovered by x-ray examination. A prolonged and 
cruel illness gradually put an end to all his activities. He died at 
Walter Reed Hospital in Washington at the age of 53. 



Johnny s friends remember him in his characteristic poses: stand 
ing before a blackboard or discussing problems at home. Somehow, 
his gesture, smile, and the expression of the eyes always reflected 
the kind of thought or the nature of the problem under discussion. 
He was of middle size, quite slim as a very young man, then increas 
ingly corpulent; moving about in small steps with considerable ran 
dom acceleration, but never with great speed. A smile flashed on his 
face whenever a problem exhibited features of a logical or mathe 
matical paradox. Quite independently of his liking for abstract wit, 
he had a strong appreciation (one might say almost a hunger) for 
the more earthy type of comedy and humor. 

He seemed to combine in his mind several abilities which, if not 
contradictory, at least seem separately to require such powers of con 
centration and memory that one very rarely finds them together in 
one intellect. These are: a feeling for the set-theoretical, formally 
algebraic basis of mathematical thought, the knowledge and under 
standing of the substance of classical mathematics in analysis and 
geometry, and a very acute perception of the potentialities of modern 
mathematical methods for the formulation of existing and new prob 
lems of theoretical physics. All this is specifically demonstrated by 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 5 

his brilliant and original work which covers a very wide spectrum of 
contemporary scientific thought. 

His conversations with friends on scientific subjects could last for 
hours. There never was a lack of subjects, even when one departed 
from mathematical topics. 

Johnny had a vivid interest in people and delighted in gossip. One 
often had the feeling that in his memory he was making a collection of 
human peculiarities as if preparing a statistical study. He followed 
also the changes brought by the passage of time. When a young man, 
he mentioned to me several times his belief that the primary mathe 
matical powers decline after the age of about 26, but that a certain 
more prosaic shrewdness developed by experience manages to com 
pensate for this gradual loss, at least for a time. Later, this limiting 
age was slowly raised. 

He engaged occasionally in conversational evaluations of other 
scientists; he was, on the whole, quite generous in his opinions, but 
often able to damn by faint praise. The expressed judgment was, in 
general, very cautious, and he was certainly unwilling to state any 
final opinions about others: "Let Rhadamantys and Minos . . . 
judge . . . ." Once when asked, he said that he would consider Erhard 
Schmidt and Hermann Weyl among the mathematicians who es 
pecially influenced him technically in his early life. 

Johnny was regarded by many as an excellent chairman of com 
mittees (this peculiar contemporary activity). He would press 
strongly his technical views, but defer rather easily on personal or 
organizational matters. 

In spite of his great powers and his full consciousness of them, he 
lacked a certain self-confidence, admiring greatly a few mathemati 
cians and physicists who possessed qualities which he did not believe 
he himself had in the highest possible degree. The qualities which 
evoked this feeling on his part were, I felt, relatively simple-minded 
powers of intuition of new truths, or the gift for a seemingly irrational 
perception of proofs or formulation of new theorems. 

Quite aware that the criteria of value in mathematical work are, 
to some extent, purely aesthetic, he once expressed an apprehension 
that the values put on abstract scientific achievement in our present 
civilization might diminish: "The interests of humanity may change, 
the present curiosities in science may cease, and entirely different 
things may occupy the human mind in the future." One conversation 
centered on the ever accelerating progress of technology and changes 
in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching 
some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which 
human affairs, as we know them, could not continue. 



6 S. ULAM 

His friends enjoyed his great sense of humor. Among fellow scien 
tists, he could make illuminating, often ironical, comments on his 
torical or social phenomena with a mathematician s formulation, 
exhibiting the humor inherent in some statement true only in the 
vacuous set. These often could be appreciated only by mathemati 
cians. He certainly did not consider mathematics sacrosanct. I re 
member a discussion in Los Alamos, in connection with some physical 
problems where a mathematical argument used the existence of ergod- 
ic transformations and fixed points. He remarked with a sudden 
smile, "Modern mathematics can be applied after all! It isn t clear, 
a priori, is it, that it could be so . ..." 

I would say that his main interest after science was in the study of 
history. His knowledge of ancient history was unbelievably detailed. 
He remembered, for instance, all the anecdotical material in Gibbon s 
Decline and Fall and liked to engage after dinner in historical discus 
sions. On a trip south, to a meeting of the American Mathematical 
Society at Duke University, passing near the battlefields of the Civil 
War he amazed us by his familiarity with the minutest features of 
the battles. This encyclopedic knowledge molded his views on the 
course of future events by inducing a sort of analytic continuation. 
I can testify that in his forecasts of political events leading to the 
Second World War and of military events during the war, most of his 
guesses were amazingly correct. After the end of the Second World 
War, however, his apprehensions of an almost immediate subsequent 
calamity, which he considered as extremely likely, proved fortunately 
wrong. There was perhaps an inclination to take a too exclusively 
rational point of view about the cases of historical events. This 
tendency was possibly due to an over-formalized game theory ap 
proach. 

Among other accomplishments, Johnny was an excellent linguist. 
He remembered his school Latin and Greek remarkably well. In 
addition to English, he spoke German and French fluently. His lec 
tures in this country were well known for their literary quality (with 
very few characteristic mispronunciations which his friends antici 
pated joyfully, e.g., "integhers"). During his frequent visits to Los 
Alamos and Santa Fe (New Mexico), he displayed a less perfect 
knowledge of Spanish, and on a trip to Mexico, he tried to make 
himself understood by using "neo-Castilian," a creation of his own 
English words with an "el" prefix and appropriate Spanish endings. 

Before the war, Johnny spent the summers in Europe on vacations 
and lecturing (in 1935 at Cambridge University, in 1936 at the 
Institut Henri Poincare in Paris). Often he mentioned that per- 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 7 

sonally he found doing scientific work there almost impossible be 
cause of the atmosphere of political tension. After the war he under 
took trips abroad only unwillingly. 

Ever since he came to the United States, he expressed his apprecia 
tion of the opportunities here and very high hopes for the future of 
scientific work in this country. 



To follow chronologically von Neumann s interests and accomplish 
ments is to review a large part of the whole scientific development of 
the last three decades. In his youthful work, he was concerned not 
only with mathematical logic and the axiomatics of set theory, but, 
simultaneously, with the substance of set theory itself, obtaining 
interesting results in measure theory and the theory of real variables. 
It was in this period also that he began his classical work on quantum 
theory, the mathematical foundation of the theory of measurement 
in quantum theory and the new statistical mechanics. His profound 
studies of operators in Hilbert spaces also date from this period. 
He pushed far beyond the immediate needs of physical theories, and 
initiated a detailed study of rings of operators, which has independent 
mathematical interest. The beginning of the work on continuous 
geometries belongs to this period as well. 

Von Neumann s awareness of results obtained by other mathe 
maticians and the inherent possibilities which they offer is astonish 
ing. Early in his work, a paper by Borel on the minimax property led 
him to develop in the paper, Zur Theorie der Gesellschaft-Spiele* 
ideas which culminated later in one of his most original creations, 
the theory of games. An idea of Koopman on the possibilities of 
treating problems of classical mechanics by means of operators on a 
function space stimulated him to give the first mathematically 
rigorous proof of an ergodic theorem. Haar s construction of measure 
in groups provided the inspiration for his wonderful partial solution 
of Hilbert s fifth problem, in which he proved the possibility of in 
troducing analytical parameters in compact groups. 

In the middle 30 s, Johnny was fascinated by the problem of hy- 
drodynamical turbulence. It was then that he became aware of the 
mysteries underlying the subject of non-linear partial differential 
equations. His work, from the beginning of the Second World War, 
concerns a study of the equations of hydrodynamics and the theory 
of shocks. The phenomena described by these non-linear equations 
are bafHing analytically and defy even qualitative insight by present 

Paper [17]. 



8 S. ULAM 

methods. Numerical work seemed to him the most promising way to 
obtain a feeling for the behavior of such systems. This impelled him 
to study new possibilities of computation on electronic machines, 
ab initio. He began to work on the theory of computing and planned 
the work, to remain unfinished, on the theory of automata. It was 
at the outset of such studies that his interest in the working of the 
nervous system and the schematized properties of organisms claimed 
so much of his attention. 

This journey through many fields of mathematical sciences was not 
a result of restlessness. Neither was it a search for novelty, nor a 
desire for applying a small set of general methods to many diverse 
special cases. Mathematics, in contrast to theoretical physics, is not 
confined to a few central problems. The search for unity, if pursued 
on a purely formal basis, von Neumann considered doomed to failure. 
This wide range of curiosity had its basis in some metamathematical 
motivations and was influenced strongly by the world of physical phe 
nomena these will probably defy formalization for a long time tocome. 

Mathematicians, at the outset of their creative work, are often 
confronted by two conflicting motivations: the first is to contribute 
to the edifice of existing work it is there that one can be sure of 
gaining recognition quickly by solving outstanding problems the 
second is the desire to blaze new trails and to create new syntheses. 
This latter course is a more risky undertaking, the final judgment of 
value or success appearing only in the future. In his early work, 
Johnny chose the first of these alternatives. It was toward the end of 
his life that he felt sure enough of himself to engage freely and yet 
painstakingly in the creation of a possible new mathematical dis 
cipline. This was to be a combinatorial theory of automata and or 
ganisms. His illness and premature death permitted him to make only 
a beginning. 

In his constant search for applicability and in his general mathe 
matical instinct for all exact sciences, he brought to mind Euler, 
Poincare, or in more recent times, perhaps Hermann Weyl. One 
should remember that the diversity and complexity of contemporary 
problems surpass enormously the situation confronting the first two 
named. In one of his last articles, Johnny deplored the fact that it 
does not seem possible nowadays for any one brain to have more than 
a passing knowledge of more than one-third of the field of pure mathe 
matics. 

Early work, set-theory, algebra. The first paper, a joint work with 
Fekete, deals with zeros of certain minimal polynomials. It concerns 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 9 

a generalization of Fejer s theorem on location of the roots of Tcheby- 
scheff polynomials. Its date is 1922. Von Neumann was not quite 
eighteen when the article appeared. 

Another youthful work is contained in a paper (in Hungarian with 
a German summary) on uniformly dense sequences of numbers. It 
contains a theorem on the possibility of re-ordering dense sequences 
of points so they will become uniformly dense; the work does not yet 
indicate the future depth of formulations nor is it technically difficult, 
but the choice of subject and the conciseness of technique in proofs 
begins to indicate the combination of set-theoretical intuition and 
the algebraic technique of his future investigations. 

The set-theoretical orientation in the thinking of a great number of 
young "mathematicians is quite characteristic of this era. The great 
ideas of George Cantor, which found their fruition finally in the 
theory of real variables, topology and later in analysis, through the 
work of the great Frenchmen, Baire, Borel, Lebesgue, and others, 
were not yet commonly part of the fundamental intuitions of young 
mathematicians at the turn of the century. After the end of the 
First World War, however, one notices that these ideas became more, 
as it were, naturally instinctive for the new generation. 

Paper [2] in the Acta Szeged on transfinite ordinals already shows 
von Neumann in his characteristic form and style in dealing with the 
algebraic treatment of set theory. The first sentence states frankly: 
"The aim of this work is to formulate concretely and precisely the 
idea of Cantor s ordinal numbers." As the preface states, the hereto 
fore somewhat vague formulation of Cantor himself is replaced by 
definitions which can be given in the system of axioms of Zermelo. 
Moreover, a rigorous foundation for the definition by transfinite in 
duction is outlined. The introduction stresses the strictly formalistic 
approach, and von Neumann states somewhat proudly that the 
symbols . . . (for "et cetera") and similar expressions are never em 
ployed. This treatment of ordinal numbers, later also considered by 
Kuratowski, is to this day the best introduction of this idea, so im 
portant for "constructions" in abstract set theory. Each ordinal 
number by von Neumann s definition is the set of all smaller ordinal 
numbers. This leads to a most elegant theory and moreover allows 
one to avoid the concept of ordertype, which is vague insofar as the 
set of all ordered sets similar to a given one does not exist in axiomatic 
set theory. 

Paper [5] on Priifer s theory of ideal algebraic numbers begins to 
indicate his future breadth of interests. The paper deals with set 
theoretical questions and enumeration problems about relatively 



10 S. ULAM 

prime ideal components. Prlifer had introduced ideal numbers as 
"ideal solutions of infinite systems of congruences." Von Neumann 
starts with methods analogous to Kiirschak and Bauer s work on 
Hensel s p-adic numbers. Here again, von Neumann exhibits the 
techniques which were to become so prevalent in the following 
decades in mathematical research of continuing algebraical con 
structions, originally considered on finite sets, to the domain of the 
infinitely enumerable and the continuum. Another indication of his 
algebraic interests is a short note [39] on Minkowski s theory of 
linear forms. 

A desire to axiomatize and this in a sense more formal and precise 
than that originally considered by logicians at the beginning of the 
20th century shows through much of the early work. From around 
1925 to 1929, most of von Neumann s papers deal with attempts to 
spread the spirit of axiomatization even through physical theory. 
Not satisfied with the existing formulations, even in set theory itself, 
he states again quite frankly in the first sentence of his paper [3] 
on the axiomatization of set theory: 3 "The aim of the present work 
is to give a logically unobjectionable axiomatic treatment of set 
theory"; the next sentence reads, "I would like to say something at 
first about difficulties which make such a construction of set theory 
desirable." 

The last sentence of this 1925 paper is most interesting. Von 
Neumann points out the limits of any axiomatic formulation. There 
is here perhaps a vague forecast of Godel s results on the existence of 
undecidable propositions in any formal system. The concluding 
sentence is: "We cannot, for the present, do more than to state that 



3 About this paper, Professor Fraenkel of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem 
wrote me the following: 

"Around 1922-23, being then professor at Marburg University, I received from 
Professor Erhard Schmidt, Berlin (on behalf of the Redaktion of the Mathematische 
Zeitschrift) a long manuscript of an author unknown to me, Johann von Neumann, 
with the title Die Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre, this being his eventual doctor 
dissertation which appeared in the Zeitschrift only in 1928, (Vol. 27). I was asked to 
express my view since it seemed incomprehensible. I don t maintain that I understood 
everything, but enough to see that this was an outstanding work and to recognize ex 
ungue leonem. While answering in this sense, I invited the young scholar to visit me 
(in Marburg) and discussed things with him, strongly advising him to prepare the 
ground for the understanding of so technical an essay by a more informal essay 
which should stress the new access to the problem and its fundamental consequences. 
He wrote such an essay under the title, Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre, and I 
published it in 1925 in the Journal fiir Mathematik (vol. 154) of which I was then 
Associate Editor." 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 11 

there are here objections against set theory itself, and there is no 
way known at present to avoid these difficulties." (One is reminded 
here, perhaps, of an analogous statement in an entirely different 
domain of science: Pauli s evaluation of the state of relativistic 
quantum theory written in his Handbuch der Physik article and the 
still mysterious role of infinities and divergences in field theory.) 

His second paper [is] on this subject has the title, The axiomatiza- 
tion of set theory (An axiomatization of set theory was the 1925 title). 

The conciseness of the system of axioms is surprising, the introduc 
tion of objects of the first and second type corresponding, respec 
tively, to sets and properties of sets in the naive set theory; the 
axioms take only a little more than one page of print. This is sufficient 
to build up practically all of the naive set theory and therewith all of 
modern mathematics and constitutes, to this day, one of the best 
foundations for set-theoretical mathematics. Godel, in his great work 
on the independence of the axiom of choice, and on the continuum 
hypothesis, uses a system inspired by this treatment. It is noteworthy 
that in his first paper on the axiomatization of set theory, von Neu 
mann recognizes explicitly the two fundamentally different directions 
taken by mathematicians in order to avoid the antinomies of Burali- 
Forti, Richard and Russell. One group, containing Russell, J. Konig, 
Brouwer, and Weyl, takes the more radical point of view that the 
entire logical foundations of exact sciences have to be restricted in 
order to prevent the appearance of paradoxes of the above type. 
Von Neumann says, "the general impression of their activity is almost 
crushing." He objects to Russell s building the system of mathe 
matics on the highly problematic axiom of reducibility, and objects 
to Weyl s and Brouwer s rejection of what he considers as the greater 
part of mathematics and set theory. 

He has more sympathy with the second less radical group, naming 
in it Zermelo, Fraenkel, and Schoenflies. He considers their work, 
including his own, as far from complete, stating explicitly that the 
axioms appear somewhat arbitrary. He states that one cannot show 
in this fashion that antinomies are really excluded but while naive 
set theory cannot be considered too seriously, at least much of what 
it contains can be rehabilitated as a formal system, and the sense of 
"formalistic" can be defined in a clear fashion. 

Von Neumann s system gives the first foundation of set theory on 
the basis of a finite number of axioms of the same simple logical 
structure as have, e.g., the axioms of elementary geometry. The 
conciseness of the system of axioms and the formal character of the 
reasoning employed seem to realize Hilbert s goal of treating mathe- 



12 S. ULAM 

matics as a finite game. Here one can divine the germ of von Neu 
mann s future interest in computing machines and the "mechaniza 
tion" of proofs. 

Starting with the axioms, the efficiency of the algebraic manipula 
tion in the derivation of most of the important notions of set theory 
is astounding; the economy of the treatment seems to indicate a 
more fundamental interest in brevity than in virtuosity for its own 
sake. It thereby helped prepare the grounds for an investigation of 
the limits of finite formalism by means of the concept of "machine" 
or "automaton." 4 

It seems curious to me that in the many mathematical conversa 
tions on topics belonging to set theory and allied fields, von Neumann 
even seemed to think formally. Most mathematicians, when dis 
cussing problems in these fields, seemingly have an intuitive frame 
work based on geometrical or almost tactile pictures of abstract sets, 
transformations, etc. Von Neumann gave the impression of operating 
sequentially by purely formal deductions. What I mean to say is 
that the basis of his intuition, which could produce new theorems 
and proofs just as well as the "naive" intuition, seemed to be of a 
type that is much rarer. If one has to divide mathematicians, as 
Poincare proposed, into two types those with visual and those with 
auditory intuition Johnny perhaps belonged to the latter. In him, 
the "auditory sense," however, probably was very abstract. It in 
volved, rather, a complementarity between the formal appearance of 
a collection of symbols and the game played with them on the one 
hand, and an interpretation of their meanings on the other. The fore 
going distinction is somewhat like that between a mental picture of 
the physical chess board and a mental picture of a sequence of moves 
on it, written down in algebraic notation. 

In conversations, some quite recent, on the present status of 
foundations of mathematics, von Neumann seemed to imply that in 
his view, the story is far from having been told. Godel s discovery 
should lead to a new approach to the understanding of the role of 
formalism in mathematics, rather than be considered as closing the 
subject. 

Paper [16] translates into strictly axiomatic treatment what was 
done informally in paper [2]. The first part of the paper deals with 
the introduction of the fundamental operations in set theory, the 
foundation of the theories of equivalence, similarity, well-ordering, 
and finally, a proof of the possibility of definition by finite or trans- 



4 This was, of course, very much in Leibniz s mind. 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 13 

finite induction, including a treatment of ordinal numbers. Von 
Neumann rightly insists at the end of his introduction to the paper 
that transfinite induction was not rigorously introduced before in any 
axiomatic or non-axiomatic system of set theory. 

Perhaps the most interesting of von Neumann s papers on axio- 
matics of set theory is [23 ]. It has to do with a certain necessary and 
sufficient condition which a property of sets must satisfy in order to 
define a set of sets. The condition is that there must not exist a one- 
to-one correspondence between all sets and the sets which have the 
property in question. This existential principle for sets had been as 
sumed as an axiom 5 by von Neumann and some of the axioms as 
sumed in other systems, in particular the axiom of choice, had been 
derived from it. Now it is shown that, vice versa, these other axioms 
imply von Neumann s axiom, which thereby is proved consistent, 
provided the usual axioms are. 

No. [12] his great paper in the Mathematische Zeitschrift, Zur 
Hilbertschen Beweistheorie, is devoted to the problem of the freedom 
from contradiction of mathematics. This classical study contains an 
exposition of the primitive ideas underlying mathematical formalisms 
in general. It is stressed that the whole complex of problems, origi 
nated and developed by Hilbert and also treated by Bernays and 
Ackermann, have not been satisfactorily solved. In particular, it is 
pointed out that Ackermann s proof of freedom from contradiction 
cannot be carried through for classical analysis. It is replaced by a 
rigorous finitary proof for a certain subsystem. In fact von Neumann s 
proof shows (although this is not stated explicitly) that finitely 
iterated application of quantifiers and propositional connectives to 
any finitary (i.e., decidable) relations is consistent. This is not far 
from the limit of what can be obtained on the basis of Hilbert s origi 
nal program, i.e., with strictly finitary methods. But von Neumann 
at that time conjectured that all of analysis can be proved consistent 
with the same method. At the present time, one cannot escape the 
impression that the ideas initiated by the work of Hilbert and his 
school, developed with such precision, and then revolutionized by 

6 Godel says about this axiom: "The great interest which this axiom has lies in the 
fact that it is a maximum principle, somewhat similar to Hilbert s axiom of complete 
ness in geometry. For, roughly speaking, it says that any set which does not, in a cer 
tain well denned way, imply an inconsistency exists. Its being a maximum principle 
also explains the fact that this axiom implies the axiom of choice. I believe that the 
basic problems of abstract set theory, such as Cantor s continuum problem, will be 
solved satisfactorily only with the help of stronger axioms of this kind, which in a 
sense are opposite or complementary to the constructivistic interpretation of mathe 
matics." 



14 S. ULAM 

Godel, are not yet exhausted. It might be that we are in the midst 
of another great evolution: the "naive" treatment of set theory and 
the formal metamathematical attempts to contain the set of our 
intuitions about infinity are, I think, turning toward a future "super 
set theory." Several times in the history of mathematics, the in 
tuitions or, one might better say, common vague feelings of leading 
mathematicians about problems of existing science, later became in 
corporated in a formal "super system" dealing with the essence of 
problems in the original system. 

Von Neumann pursued his interest in problems of foundations of 
mathematics until the end of his life. A quarter of a century after the 
appearance of the above series of papers, one can see the imprint of 
this work in his discoveries in the plans for the logic of computing 
machines. 

Parallel to the work on foundations of mathematics, there come 
specific results in set theory itself and set-theoretically motivated 
theorems in real variables and in algebra. For example, von Neumann 
shows the existence of a set M of real numbers, of the power of the 
continuum, such that any finite number of the elements of M are 
algebraically independent. The proof is given effectively without the 
axiom of choice. In a paper in Fundamenta Mathematicae, [14] the 
same year, a decomposition of the interval is given into countably 
many disjoint and congruent subsets. This solved a problem of Stein- 
haus a special ingenuity is required to have such a decomposition 
on an interval the corresponding construction of Hausdorff for the 
circumference of a circle is much easier. (This is due to the fact that 
the circumference of a circle may be regarded as a group manifold.) 

In paper [28] on the general measure theory, in Fundamenta 
(1928), the problem of a finitely additive measure is treated for sub 
sets of groups. The paradoxical decompositions of the sphere by 
Hausdorff and the wonderfully strange decompositions of Banach 
and Tarski are generalized from the Euclidean space to general non- 
Abelian groups. The affirmative results of Banach on the possibility 
of a measure for all subsets of the plane are generalized to the case 
of subsets of a commutative group. The final conclusion is that all 
solvable groups are "measurable" (i.e. such measure can be intro 
duced in them). 

The problems and methods of this article form one of the first in 
stances of a trend which developed strongly since that time, that of 
generalizing the set-theoretical results from Euclidean space to more 
general topological and algebraic structures. The "congruence" of 
two sets is understood to mean equivalence under a transformation 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 15 

belonging to a given group of transformations. The measure is a 
general additive set function. Again, the formulation of the problem 
presages the work of Haar and the study of Hausdorff-Banach- 
Tarski paradoxical decompositions. 6 

In the same "annus mirabilis," 1928, there appears the article on 
the theory of games. This is his first work on what was to become 
later an important combinatorial theory with so many applications 
and developments vigorously continuing at the present time. It is 
hard to believe that beginning with 1927, simultaneously with the 
work discussed above, he could have published numerous papers on 
the mathematical foundations of quantum theory, probability in 
statistical quantum theory, and some important results on repre 
sentation of continuous groups! 

Theory of functions of real variables, measure theory, topology, 
continuous groups. Professor Halmos article describes von Neu 
mann s important contributions to measure theory. We shall briefly 
mention some of his results in this field viewed against the back 
ground of his other work. 

Paper [35] solves a problem of Haar. It concerns the selection of 
representatives from classes of functions which are equivalent up to a 
set of measure zero from linear manifolds over products of powers of 
finite systems. The problem is generalized to measures other than 
Lebesgue s and an analogous problem is solved affirmatively. 

[45] contains a proof of an important fact in measure theory: Any 
Boolean mapping between two classes of measurable sets (on two 
measure spaces) which preserves their measures is generated by a 
point transformation preserving measure. This result is important in 
showing the equivalence of rather general measure spaces, when they 
are separable and complete, to Euclidean spaces with Lebesgue meas 
ure, and permits one to reduce the study of Boolean algebras of meas 
urable sets to ordinary measures. 

In [5l] von Neumann proves the uniqueness of the Haar measure 
as constructed by A. Haar (in Ann. of Math. vol. 34, pp. 147-169), if 
one requires either left or right invariance of the (Lebesgue-type) 
measure under group multiplication. The theorem on uniqueness is 
proved for compact groups. A construction different from that of 
Haar is employed to introduce his measure. This paper precedes the 
construction of a general theory of almost periodic functions on 
separable topological groups and allows a theory of their orthogonal 
representations. 

6 Recently pushed to the most extreme minimal form by R. M. Robinson. 



16 S. ULAM 

In paper [54] the ordinary notion of completeness, usually defined 
only for metric spaces, is generalized for linear topological spaces. 
Interesting examples of spaces which are not metric but complete are 
produced. Such cases involve, of course, non-separable spaces. The 
paper also contains a novel construction of pseudo-metrics and convex 
spaces. 

In a joint paper with P. Jordan [59], a solution is given to a ques 
tion raised by Frechet of the characterization of generalized Hilbert 
space among linear metric spaces. The condition which is necessary 
and sufficient, strengthening a result of Frechet, is: A linear metric 
space L is isometric with a Hilbert space if and only if every 2-dimen- 
sional linear subspace is isometric with a Euclidean space. 

The results of [35] are generalized in a joint paper with M. H. 
Stone [60 ] and deal with selection of representative elements from 
residual classes in an abstract ring modulo a given left- and right- 
ideal. The article contains a number of theorems on representations 
of Boolean rings modulo an ideal. 

In the Russian "Sbornik," [64], von Neumann deals again with the 
problem of the uniqueness of Haar s measure. The previous proof of 
uniqueness was accomplished through a constructive process different 
from that of Haar, which contained no arbitrary elements and led 
automatically to the uniqueness of the measure. In this paper an in 
dependent treatment of uniqueness of the left- and right-invariant 
exterior measure is given for locally compact separable groups. (A 
different proof was obtained simultaneously by Andre Weil.) 

In a joint paper with Kuratowski, [69], precise and strong results 
are obtained on the projectivity of certain sets of real numbers de 
fined by transfinite induction. The celebrated set of Lebesgue, 7 shown 
previously by Kuratowski to be of projective class 3, is shown to be 
a difference of two analytic sets and therefore of the second projective 
class. A general theorem is proved on the analytic character of sets 
(in the sense of Hausdorff) obtained by certain general constructions. 
This result is likely to play an important role in the still incomplete 
theory of projective sets. 

The Memoire in Compositio Mathematica, [75], on infinite direct 
products contains an algebraic theory of operators and a measure 
theory for such systems, so important in modern abstract analysis. 
It summarizes some of the previous work on the algebra of functional 
operators and topology of rings of operators, including the non- 
separable hyper-Hilbert spaces. Methodologically and in the actual 
constructions, this paper is both a forerunner of and a good introduc- 



7 Journal de Mathematiques, 1905, Chapter VIII. 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 17 

tion to much of the recent work in mathematics dealing, so to say, 
with the pyramiding of algebraical notions. Starting with a vector 
space, one deals first with their products, then with linear operators 
on these structures; and finally with classes of such operators whose 
algebraical properties are investigated again "on the first level." Von 
Neumann intended to discuss the analogy of this elaborate system 
with the theory of hyperquantization in quantum theory, and con 
sidered the paper in particular as a mathematical preparation for 
dealing with non-enumerable products. 

The paper [24] is, I believe, the first one in which a very significant 
contribution is made to the complex of questions originating in 
Hilbert s fifth problem: the possibility of a change of parameters in a 
continuous group so that the group operation will become analytic. 
The work deals with subgroups of the group of linear transformations 
of w-dimensional space and the result is affirmative: Every such con 
tinuous group has a normal subgroup, locally representable analyti 
cally and in a one-to-one way by a finite number of parameters. 

This is the first of the theorems showing that the group property 
prevents the "pathological" possibilities common in the theory of 
functions of a real variable. The results of the paper, later generalized 
and simplified by E. Cartan for subgroups of general Lie groups, 
give detailed insight into the structure of such groups by the repre 
sentation of elements as products of exponential operators. They 
show that every linear manifold which contains with every two 
matrices U, V also their commutator UV VU, is an infinitesimal 
group of an entire group G. This paper is historically important, 
as preceding the work of Cartan, a later paper of Ado, and of course, 
von Neumann s own paper [48] where Hilbert s fifth problem is 
solved for compact groups. 

This celebrated result is based on and stimulated by a paper of 
Haar (in the same volume of Annals of Math.) where an invariant 
measure function is introduced in continuous groups. Von Neumann 
shows, (using an analogue of the Peter-Weyl integration on groups 
and employing the theorem on approximability of functions by linear 
combinations of a finite number of eigenfunctions of an integral 
operator the method of E. Schmidt s dissertation and with an in 
genious use of Brouwer s theorem on invariance of region in Euclidean 
w-dimensional space) that every compact and w-dimensional topo- 
logical group is continuously isomorphic to a closed group of unitary 
matrices of a finite dimensional Euclidean space. 

The method of this article allows one to represent more general 
(not necessarily w-dimensional) groups as subgroups of infinite 
products of such w-dimensional groups. In the second part of the 



18 S. ULAM 

paper, an example is given of a finite dimensional non-compact group 
of transformations acting on Euclidean space in such a way that no 
change of parameters in the space will make the given transforma 
tions analytic. It was almost twenty years before the solution of 
Hilbert s fifth problem was completed, to include the "open" (i.e., 
non-compact) w-dimensional groups, by the work of Montgomery 
and Gleason. Von Neumann s achievement required an intimate 
knowledge of both the set-theoretical, real variable techniques, a feel 
ing for the spirit of Brouwerian topology, and a real understanding 
of the technique of integral equations and the calculus of matrices. 

A combination of virtuosity in the mode of abstract algebraic 
thinking and the employment of analytical techniques can be seen 
in the joint paper [50 ] with Jordan and Wigner on an algebraic 
generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism. This is con 
ceived as a possible starting point for future generalizations of the 
quantum mechanical theories and deals with commutative but not 
associative hypercomplex algebras. The essential result is that all 
such formally real finite and commutative r-number systems 
are merely matrix algebras, with one exception. This exception, how 
ever, seems too narrow for the generalizations needed in quantum the 
ories. 

An unpublished result, announced in the Bulletin of the American 
Mathematical Society [14, Appendix 2] contains the theorem on the 
simplicity (of the component of unity) of the group of all homeo- 
morphisms of the surface of the 3-dimensional sphere. The actual 
theorem is that, given two arbitrary homeomorphisms A , B (neither 
equal to identity) there exists a fixed number (23 is sufficient!) of 
conjugates of the first one whose product is equal to B. 

Hilbert space, operator, theory, rings of operators. A detailed ac 
count of von Neumann s fundamental and comprehensive treatment 
of these topics is presented in the articles in this volume by Professor 
Murray and Professor Kadison. His first interest in this subject 
also stemmed from work on rigorous formulations of quantum theory. 
In 1954, in a questionnaire which von Neumann answered for the 
National Academy of Sciences, he named this work as one of his 
three contributions to mathematics that he considered most im 
portant. In sheer bulk alone, papers on these subjects comprise 
roughly one-third of his printed work. These contain a very detailed 
analysis of properties of linear operators and an algebraical study 
of classes (rings) of operators in infinite-dimensional spaces. The 
result fulfills his avowed purpose stated in the book, Mathematische 
Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik [47a], of demonstrating that the 
ideas originally introduced by Hilbert are capable of constituting 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 19 

an adequate basis for the physical considerations of quantum theory, 
and that no need exists for the introduction of new mathematical 
schemes for these physical theories. Von Neumann s unbelievably 
detailed and meticulous work of classification of the properties of 
linearity for unitary spaces resolves many problems for unbounded 
operators. It gives a complete theory of hypermaximal transforma 
tions and brings Hilbert space almost as completely within the 
grasp of the mathematician as is the case with the finite dimensional 
Euclidean space. 

His interest in this subject was continuous throughout his scien 
tific life. Even up to the end, in the midst of work on other subjects, 
he obtained and published results on the properties of operators and 
spectral theory. Paper [106] was published in 1950, and written in 
honor of the 75th birthday of Erhard Schmidt. (It was Schmidt who 
first introduced him to the fascinations of this subject.) No one has 
done more than von Neumann, at least in the unitary case and for 
linear transformations, towards the resolution of the mysteries of 
non-compactness. Future work in this direction will be based on his 
results for a long time to come. This work is now being vigorously 
continued by, among others, his collaborators and former students 
Murray in particular and one is entitled to expect from them further 
valuable insight into the properties of linear operators. 

Theory of lattices, continuous geometry. Birkhoff s article, von 
Neumann and lattice theory, presents the work on these subjects. Here 
again, von Neumann s interest was stimulated by the possibility of 
applying these new combinatorial and algebraic schemes to quantum 
theory. Lattice theory, around 1935, was being developed and gen 
eralized by Garrett Birkhoff from the original formulations of 
Dedekind. At about the same time, an algebraic and set-theoretical 
study of Boolean algebras was systematically undertaken by M. H. 
Stone. I remember that in the summer of 1935, Birkhoff, Stone, and 
von Neumann, on their way from a mathematical meeting in Mos 
cow, stopped in Warsaw and presented short talks at a meeting of the 
Warsaw Mathematical Society on the new developments in these 
fields with novel formulations of the logic of quantum theory. The 
ensuing discussions led one to expect far-reaching applications of the 
general Boolean Algebra and lattice theory formulations of the 
language of quantum theory. Von Neumann returned to these at 
tempts several times later in his work, but most of his thoughts in 
this direction are in unpublished notes. 8 

8 Professor Givens is preparing an edition of the lecture notes to be published 
shortly by the Princeton Press. Another paper on continuous geometry written in 1935 
is being published in the Annals of Mathematics. 



20 S. ULAM 

His work on continuous geometries and geometries without points 
was motivated by the belief that the primitive notions of quantum 
theory deal with such entities; obviously, the "universe of discourse" 
consists of certain classes of identified points or linear manifolds in 
Hilbert space. (This is noted explicitly by Dirac in his book.) 

Some of this work was considered for presentation in colloquium 
lectures; an account of it is contained in the Princeton Institute Lec 
tures; some remains in manuscript form. In conversations with him 
touching upon these problems, my impression was that, beginning 
about 1938, von Neumann felt that the new facts and problems of 
nuclear physics gave rise to problems of an entirely different type 
and made it less important to insist on a mathematically flawless 
formulation of a quantum theory of atomic phenomena alone. After 
the end of the war, he would express sentiments, somewhat similar 
to remarks reportedly made by Einstein, that the bewildering wealth 
of nuclear and elementary particle physics make premature any at 
tempt to formulate a general quantum theory of fields, at least for 
the time being. 

Theoretical physics. Professor Van Hove describes von Neumann s 
work in Von Neumann s contributions to quantum theory. 

In the questionnaire for the National Academy of Science men 
tioned earlier, von Neumann selected as his most important scien 
tific contributions work on mathematical foundations of Quantum 
Theory and the Ergodic Theorem (in addition to the Theory of 
Operators discussed above). This choice, or rather restriction, might 
appear curious to most mathematicians, but is psychologically in 
teresting. It seems to indicate that perhaps his main desire and one 
of his strongest motivations was to help re-establish the role of 
mathematics on a conceptual level in theoretical physics. The drifting 
apart of abstract mathematical research and of the main stream of 
ideas in theoretical physics since the end of the First World War is 
undeniable. Von Neumann often expressed concern that mathematics 
might not keep abreast of the exponential increase of problems and 
ideas in physical sciences. I remember a conversation in which I ad 
vanced the fear that a sort of Malthusian divergence may take place: 
the physical sciences and technology increase in a geometrical ratio 
and mathematics in an arithmetical progression. He said that this 
indeed might be the case. Later in the discussion, we both managed 
to cling, however, to the hope that the mathematical method would 
remain for a long time in conceptual control of the exact sciences! 

Article [7] is published jointly with Hilbert and Nordheim. Ac 
cording to the preface, it is based on a lecture given by Hilbert in the 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 21 

winter of 1926 on the new developments in quantum theory, and pre 
pared with the help of Nordheim. According to the introduction, 
important parts of the mathematical formulation and discussion are 
due to von Neumann. 

The stated aim of the paper is to introduce, instead of strictly 
functional relationships of classical mechanics, probability relation 
ships. It also formulates the ideas of Jordan and Dirac in a con 
siderably simpler and more comprehensible manner. Even now, 30 
years later, it is difficult to overestimate the historical importance and 
influence of this paper and the subsequent work of von Neumann in 
this direction. The great program of Hilbert in axiomatization gains 
here another vital domain of application, an isomorphism between a 
physical theory and the corresponding mathematical system. An ex 
plicit statement in the introduction to the paper is that it is difficult 
to understand the theory if its formalism and its physical interpreta 
tion are not separated concisely and completely. Such separation is 
the aim of the paper, even though it is admitted that a complete 
axiomatization was at the time impossible. May we add here paren 
thetically that such complete axiomatization of a relativistically in 
variant quantum theory, embracing its application to nuclear phe 
nomena is still to be achieved. 9 The paper contains an outline of the 
calculus of operators which correspond to physical observables, dis 
cusses the properties of Hermitean operators, and altogether forms a 
prelude to the Mathematische Begrundung der Quantenmechanik. 

Von Neumann s precise and definitive ideas on the role of statisti 
cal mechanics in quantum theory and the problem of measurement 
are introduced in [lOJ. 

His well-known book, [47a], gives both the axiomatic treatment, 
the theory of measurement, and statistics in detailed discussions. 

At least two mathematical contributions are of importance in the 
history of quantum mechanics: The mathematical treatment by 
Dirac did not always satisfy the requirements of mathematical rigor. 
For example, it operated with the assumption that every self-adjoint 
operator can be brought into diagonal form, which forced one to 
introduce for those operators where this cannot be done, the famous 
"improper" functions of Dirac. A priori it might seem, as von 
Neumann states, that just as Newtonian mechanics required (at that 



9 For an excellent succinct summary of the present state of axiomatizations of 
non-relativistic quantum theory in the domain of atomic phenomena, see the article 
by George Mackey, Quantum mechanics and Hilbert space, Amer. Math. Monthly, 
October, 1957, still based essentially on von Neumann s book, Mathematiscfa Grund- 
lagen der Quantenmechanik. 



22 S. ULAM 

time) the contradictory infinitesimal calculus, so quantum theory 
seemed to need a new form of analysis of infinitely many variables. 
Von Neumann s achievement was to show that this was not the case, 
namely, that the transformation theory could be put on a clear 
mathematical basis not by making precise the methods of Dirac but 
by developing Hilbert s spectral theory of operators. In particular, 
this was accomplished by his study of non-bounded operators going 
beyond the classical theory of Hilbert, F. Riesz, E. Schmidt, and 
others. 

The second contribution forms the substance of Chapters 5 and 6 
of his book. It has to do with the problems of measure and reversibil 
ity in quantum theory. Almost from the beginning, when the ideas of 
Heisenberg, Schrodinger, Dirac, and Born were enjoying their first 
sensational success, questions were raised on the role of indeter- 
minism in the theory and proposals made to explain it by the assump 
tion of possible "hidden" parameters which, when discovered in the 
future, would allow a return to a more deterministic description. Von 
Neumann shows that the statistical character of statements of the 
theory is not due to the fact that the state of the observer who per 
forms the measurement is unknown. The system comprising both the 
observed and observer leads to the uncertainty relations even if one 
admits an exact state of the observer. This is shown to be the con 
sequence of the previous assumptions of quantum theory involving 
the general properties of association of physical quantities with opera 
tors in Hilbert space. 10 

Apart from the great didactic value of this work which presented 
the ideas of the new quantum theory in a form congenial and tech 
nically interesting to mathematicians, it is a contribution of ab 
solutely first importance, considered as an attempt to make a rational 
presentation of a physical theory which, as originally conceived by 
the physicists, was based on non-universally communicable intui 
tions. While it cannot be asserted that it introduced ideas of novel 
physical import and the quantum theory as conceived during these 
years by Schrodinger, Heisenberg, Dirac, and others still forms only 
an incomplete theoretical skeleton for the more baffling physical 
phenomena discovered since von Neumann s treatment allows at 

10 It is impossible to summarize here the mathematical argument involved. The 
great majority of physicists still agree with von Neumann s proposition. This is not 
to say that a theory different from the present mathematical formulations of quantum 
mechanics might not allow such a role for hidden parameters. For a recent discussion, 
see Volume 9 of the Colston Papers, being the Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium 
of the Colston Research Society held in the University of Bristol, April 1-April 4, 
1957, discussions of Bohm, Rosenfeld, et al. 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 23 

least one logically and mathematically clear basis for a rigorous treat 
ment. 

Analysis, numerical work, work in hydrodynamics. An early paper 
is [33]. In it, a fundamental lemma in the calculus of variations due 
to Rado is proved by means of a simple geometrical construction 
(the lemma asserts that a function z =f(x, y) satisfies a Lipschitz 
condition with a constant A if no plane whose maximal inclination is 
greater than A meets the boundary of the surface defined by the 
given function in three or more points). The paper is also interesting 
in that the method of proof involves direct geometric visualizations 
somewhat rare in von Neumann s published work. 

The paper [4l] contains one of the impressive achievements of 
mathematical analysis in the last quarter century. It is the first pre 
cise mathematical result in a whole field of investigation: a rigorous 
treatment of the ergodic hypothesis in statistical mechanics. It was 
stimulated by the discovery by Koopman of the possibility of reduc 
ing the study of Hamiltonian dynamical systems to that of operators 
in Hilbert space. Using Koopman s representation, von Neumann 
proved what is now known as the weak ergodic theorem, or the con 
vergence in measure of the means of functions of the iterated, meas 
ure-preserving transformation on a measure space. It is this theorem, 
strengthened shortly afterwards by G. D. Birkhoff, in the form of 
convergence almost everywhere, which provided the first rigorous 
mathematical basis for the foundations of classical statistical me 
chanics. The subsequent developments in this field and the numerous 
generalizations of these results are well-known and will not be men 
tioned here in detail. Again, this success was due to the combination 
of von Neumann s mastery of the techniques of the set-theoretically 
inspired methods of analysis and those originating in his own work on 
operators on Hilbert space. Still another domain of mathematical 
physics became accessible to precise and general considerations of 
modern analysis. In this instance again, a great initial advance was 
scored, but, of course, here the story is really quite unfinished; a 
mathematical treatment of the foundations of statistical mechanics, 
in the case of classical dynamics, is far from complete! It is very well 
to have the ergodic theorems and the knowledge of the existence of 
metrically transitive transformations; these facts, however, form 
only a basis of the subject. Von Neumann often expressed in conversa 
tions a feeling that future progress will depend on theorems which 
would allow a mathematically satisfactory treatment of the sub 
sequent parts of the subject. A complete mathematical theory of the 



24 S. ULAM 

Boltzmann equation and precise theorems on the rates at which sys 
tems tend towards equilibrium are needed. 

Important work is contained in the article [56], a joint work with 
S. Bochner. The use of operator-theoretical methods allows a rather 
profound discussion of the properties of partial differential equations 
of the type A(f&gt;=d(f&gt;/dt, &lt;/&gt; =&lt;(/; x, y, 2), with A of the form 



/ d 2 d 2 d 2 \ 
A = a(- - + + ) 

W dy 2 dz 2 / 



df 

as in problems of heat conduction, or A =(2Tri/h)H, where H is the 
energy operator in Schrodinger s quantum mechanical equation for 
non-stationary states. 

An example of the combination of analytical and geometrical 
techniques is the joint work with Schoenberg [80 ]. If 5 is a metric 
space, d(f, g) being the distance between any two elements of it, we 
call a function, f t , whose values lie in S and which is continuous, a 
screw function if d(f t , /) = F(t s). The fundamental theorem de 
termines the class of all such functions on a Hilbert space and de 
termines their form. (Any such function F(t) is given by 






/ 
j 



where y(u) is non-decreasing for u ^ and such that f?u~ 2 dy (u) exists.) 
The paper [86], perhaps less well-known than it deserves to be, 
shows an increasing interest in approximation problems and in numer 
ical work. It seems to me of very considerable didactical value. It deals 
with properties of finite NXN matrices for large N. The behavior 
of the space of all linear operations on the TV-dimensional complex 
Euclidean space is investigated. This is done in detail directly, and 
it is stated explicitly in the preface that such an asymptotic approach 
has been unjustifiably neglected compared to the usual approach 
which is the study of the limiting case, i.e., the actually infinitely 
dimensional unitary space, that is to say, Hilbert space. (It is curious 
to contrast this statement with the almost opposite point of view 
expressed in the introduction to his book, Mathematische Grundlagen 
der Quantenmechanik.) 

In general terms, the paper deals with the question of which Nth 
order matrices behave or behave approximately as if they were mth 
order matrices, (m being small compared to N and a divisor of it.) 
The notion of approximate behavior is made precise in a given metric 
or pseudo metric in the space of matrices. I should like to add that 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 25 

this paper has a praiseworthy elementary character of exposition not 
always found in his work on Hilbert space. 

Work belonging to this same order of ideas is continued in his 
joint paper [91 ] with Bargmann and Montgomery. It contains an 
account of various methods of solving a system of linear equations 
and is oriented towards the possibilities, already beginning to appear 
at that time, of computations involving the use of electronic ma 
chines. 

In problems of applied analysis, the war years brought a need for 
quick estimates and approximate results in problems which often do 
not present a very "clean" appearance, that is to say, are mathe 
matically very inhomogeneous, the physical phenomena to be cal 
culated involving, in addition to the main process, a number of ex 
ternal perturbations whose effect cannot be neglected or even sepa 
rated in additional variables. This situation comes up often in ques 
tions of present day technology and forces one, at least initially, to 
resort to numerical methods, not because one requires the results 
with high accuracy but simply to achieve qualitative orientation! 
This fact, perhaps somewhat deplorable for a mathematical purist, 
was realized by von Neumann whose interest in numerical analysis 
increased greatly at that time. 

A joint work with H. H. Goldstine, [94], presents a study of the 
problem of the numerical inversion of matrices of high order. Among 
other things, it attempts to give rigorous error estimates. Interesting 
results are obtained on the precision achievable in inverting matrices 
of order 150. Estimates are obtained "in the general case." ("Gen 
eral" means that under plausible assumed statistics, these estimates 
hold with the exception of a set of low probability.) 

In a subsequent paper on this subject, [109], the problem is re 
considered in an effort to obtain optimum numerical estimates. Given 
a matrix A = (dij)(i, j = 1, 2, n) whose elements are independent 
random variables, each normally distributed, the probability that 
the upper bound of this matrix exceeds 2.72(m 1/2 where &lt;j is the dis 
persion of each variable, is less than .027 X2~ n n~ 112 . 

The development of the fast electronic computing machines was 
prompted primarily by the need of a quick orientation and answer to 
problems in mathematical physics and engineering. There is, as a 
byproduct, an opportunity for some lighter work! Thus, for example, 
one can now try to satisfy, to a modest extent, some of the curiosity 
which is felt about certain interesting sequences of integers, e.g., to 
mention the simplest ones, the frequency of the sequence of digits in 
the development of e and TT, carried to many thousands of places. 



26 S. ULAM 

One such computation, performed on the machine at the Institute for 
Advanced Study, gives the first 2,000 partial quotients of the cube 
root of 2 in its development as a continued fraction. Johnny was in 
terested in such experimental work no matter how simple-minded 
the problem; in one discussion in Los Alamos on such questions, he 
asked to be given "interesting" numbers for computation of their 
continued fraction development. I named the quartic irrationality y 
given by the equations y \/(x-\-y) where # = l/(l-f-.r) as one in 
whose development there might appear some curious regularities. 
Computations of many other numbers were planned, but it is not 
known to me whether this little project was ever pursued. 

Game theory. This subject forms a new, rapidly developing 
chapter in present-day mathematical research; it is essentially a 
creation of von Neumann s. His fundamental work in this field will 
be described elsewhere in this volume by A. W. Tucker and H. W. 
Kuhn and I shall content myself with remarking that it presents 
some of his most fecund and influential work. It was Borel, in 
a note in the Comptes-Rendus in 1921, who first formulated a mathe 
matical scheme describing strategies in a game between two players. 
The subject can, however, be dated as really originating in the paper 
of von Neumann, [17]. It is there that the fundamental "minimax" 
theorem is proved and the general scheme of a game between n 
players (^2) is formulated. Such schemata, quite apart from their 
interest and applications to actual games in economics, etc. in 
troduced a wealth of novel combinatorial problems of purely mathe 
matical interest. The theorem that Min Max = Max Min and the 
corollaries on the existence of saddle points of functions of many 
variables is contained in his 1937 paper [72]. They are shown to be a 
consequence of a generalization of Brouwer s fixed-point theorem and 
of the following geometrical fact. Let S, T be two non-empty, convex, 
closed, and bounded sets contained in the Euclidean spaces R n and 
R m respectively. Let SXT be the direct product of these sets and F, 
W two closed subsets of it. Assume that for every element x of 5 
the set Q(x) of all y such that (x, y) belongs to V is a closed convex 
and non-empty set. Analogously, for every y in T the set P(y) of all 
x such that (x, y) belongs to W also has this property. Then the sets 
V and W have at least one point in common. This theorem, further 
discussed by Kakutani, Nash, Brown and others, plays a central 
role in the proofs of existence of "good strategies." 

Game theory, including now a study of infinite games (first formu 
lated by Mazur in Poland around 1930) is in vigorous mathematical 
development. It suffices to refer to the work contained in the three 
volumes, Contributions to Game Theory [102; 113; 114], to point 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 27 

out the wealth of ideas, the variety of ingenious formulations in 
purely mathematical context, and the increasing number of im 
portant applications; it abounds in simply stated problems still un 
solved. 

Economics. The now classical treatise by Oskar Morgenstern and 
John von Neumann, Theory of games and economic behavior [90 ] 
contains an exposition of Game Theory in its purely mathematical 
form with a very detailed account of applications to actual games; 
and together with a discussion of some fundamental questions of 
economic theory introduces a different treatment of problems of 
economic behavior and certain aspects of sociology. The economist 
Oskar Morgenstern, a friend of von Neumann s in Princeton for 
many years, interested him in aspects of economic situations, 
specifically in problems of exchange of goods between two or more 
persons, in problems of monopoly, oligopoly and free competition. 
It was in a discussion of attempts to schematize mathematically 
such processes that the present shape of this theory began to take 
form. 

The present numerous applications to "operational research," prob 
lems of communications and the statistical estimation theory of A. 
Wald either stem from or are drawing upon the ideas proposed and 
worked out in this monograph. We cannot outline in this article 
even the scope of these investigations. The interested reader may 
find an account of it in, e.g., L. Hurwicz s The theory of economic 
behavior 11 and J. Marshak s Neumann s and Morgenstern s new ap 
proach to static economics. 12 

Dynamics, mechanics of continua, meteorological calculations. 
In two papers written jointly with S. Chandrasekhar [84 and 88] the 
following problem is considered. A random distribution of mass 
centers is assumed ; these might be, for example, stars in a cluster or a 
cluster of nebulae. These masses are mutually attracting and in mo 
tion. The problem is to develop the statistics of the fluctuating 
gravitational field and the study of the motions of individual masses 
subject to the changing influence of the varying local distributions. 
In the first paper, the problem of the rate of the fluctuations in the 
distribution function for the force is solved through ingenious calcula 
tions, and a general formula is obtained for the probability distribu 
tions W(F, f) of a gravitational field strength F and an associated 
rate of change / which is the derivative of F with respect to time. 
Among the results obtained is the theorem that for weak fields the 

11 American Economic Review vol. 35 (1945) pp. 909-925. 

12 Journal of Political Economy vol. 54 (1946) pp. 97-115. 



28 S. ULAM 

probability of a change occurring in the field acting at a given instant 
of time is independent of the direction and magnitude of the initial 
field, while for strong fields, the probability of a change occurring in 
the direction of the initial field is twice as great as in a direction at 
right angles to it. 

The second paper is devoted to a statistical analysis of the speed of 
fluctuations in the force per unit mass acting on a star which moves 
with a velocity V with respect to the centroid of the nearby stars. 
This problem is solved on the assumption of a uniform Poisson dis 
tribution of the stars and a spherical distribution of the local veloc 
ities. It is solved for a general distribution of different masses. An 
expression is derived for the correlations in the force acting at two 
very close points. The method gives the asymptotic behavior of the 
space correlations. Von Neumann was long interested in the phe 
nomenon of turbulence. The writer remembers discussions in 1937 on 
the possibility of a statistical treatment of the Navier-Stokes equa 
tions by an analysis of hydrodynamical problems through replace 
ment of the partial differential equations by a system of infinitely 
many total differential equations satisfied by the Fourier coefficients 
in the development of the Lagrangian functions in a Fourier series. 
A mimeographed report written by von Neumann for the Office of 
Naval Research in 1949, Recent theories of turbulence, constitutes a 
penetrating and lucid presentation of the ideas of Onsager and 
Kolmogoroff, and of other work up to that time. 

With the beginning of the second World War, von Neumann under 
took a study of problems presented by the motions of compressible 
gases and especially the perplexing phenomena of formation of dis 
continuities, e.g., shocks. 

The greater part of his voluminous study in this field was prompted 
by problems arising in defense work. They were published in the 
form of reports. A selection is included in the bibliography. 

It is impossible to summarize here this varied work; most of it is 
characterized by his incisive analytical technique and the accus 
tomed clarity of logic. In the theory of interaction of colliding shocks, 
his contributions are especially noteworthy. One result is the first 
rigorous justification of the Chapman-Jouguet hypothesis concerning 
the process of detonation, that is, a combustion process initiated by a 
shock. 

The first systematic development of the theory of reflection of 
shock waves was initiated by von Neumann (Progress report on the 
theory of shock wave, NDRC, Div. 8, OSRD, No. 1140, 1943 and 
Oblique reflection of shocks, Navy Department, Explosive Research 
Report no. 12, 1943). 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 29 

As noted before, the problem of following, even only qualitatively, 
the motions of compressible media in two or three dimensions sur 
passes the present powers of explicit analysis. What is worse, the 
mathematical foundations of a theory which would describe the 
physical phenomena are, perhaps so far, quite inadequate. Von 
Neumann s feelings in this matter are well expressed in comments 
contained in [l08J: 

" The question as to whether a solution which one has found by mathematical reason 
really occurs in nature and whether the existence of several solutions with certain good or 
bad features can be excluded beforehand, is a quite difficult and ambiguous one. This 
subject has been considered in the classical literature as well as in the more recent literature, 
on widely varying levels of rigor and of its opposite. In summa, it is quite difficult ever 
to be sure of anything in this domain. Mathematically, one is in a continuous state of 
uncertainty, because the usual theorems of existence and uniqueness of a solution, that 
one would like to have, have never been demonstrated and are probably not true in their 
obvious forms. " 

and later, 

u Thus there exists a wide variety of mathematical possibilities in fluid mechanics, 
with respect to permitting discontinuities, demanding a reasonable thermodynamic be 
havior etc., etc. There probably exists a set of conditions under which one and only one 
solution exists in every reasonably stated problem. However, we have only surmises as to 
what it is and we have to be guided almost entirely by physical intuition in searching for 
it. It is therefore impossible to be very specific about any point. And it is difficult to say 
about any solution which has been derived, with any degree of assurance, that it is the one 
which must exist in nature." 

One has to resort to numerical work in special cases if only to get a 
heuristic insight into these difficult questions. In a whole series of 
reports, von Neumann discussed the best numerical procedures, dif 
ferencing schemes, questions of numerical stability of computational 
schemes for such calculations. One should mention in particular the 
paper [100] with Richtmyer, where, in order not to introduce ex 
plicitly the shock conditions and discontinuities, a purely mathe 
matical, fictitious viscosity is introduced, allowing one to proceed 
to calculate the motion of shocks without postulating them explicitly 
but following step by step the ordinary hydrodynamic equations. 

The formidable mathematical problems presented by the hydro- 
dynamical equations of the motions of the earth s atmosphere fasci 
nated von Neumann for a considerable time. With the advent of 
computing machines, a detailed numerical study at least of simplified 
versions of the problems became possible, and a large program of 
such work was started by him. At the Institute in Princeton, a 
meteorological research group was established; 13 the plan was to 

13 J. Charney was working closely with him on problems of meteorology, e.g., 
paper [104]. 



30 S. ULAM 

attack the problem of numerical weather solution by a step-by-step 
investigation of models which were to approximate more and more 
closely the real properties of the atmosphere. A numerical investiga 
tion of truly 3-dimensional motions is at present impractical even 
on the most advanced electronic computing machines. (This may not 
be the case, say five years from now.) 

The first highly schematized computations which von Neumann 
initiated dealt with a 2-dimensional model and for the most part in 
the so-called geostrophic approximation. Later, what might be called 
"2 + 1/2" dimensional hydrodynamical computations were performed 
by assuming two or three 2-dimensional models corresponding to 
different altitudes or pressure levels interacting with each other. This 
problem was dear to his mind, both because of its intrinsic mathe 
matical interest, and because of the enormous technological conse 
quences which a successful solution could have. He believed that our 
knowledge of dynamics of controlling processes in the atmosphere, 
together with the development of computing machines, was ap 
proaching a level that would permit weather prediction. Beyond that, 
he believed that one could understand, calculate, and perhaps put 
into effect processes ultimately permitting control and change of the 
climate. 

In the paper [120] he speculated on the approach of the time when 
one could produce, with the now available vast nuclear sources of 
energy, changes in the general circulation of the atmosphere of the 
same order of magnitude as "the great globe itself." In such problems 
where the physics of the phenomena are already understood, it might 
be that a future Mathematical Analysis will enable the human race 
to extend vastly its control over nature. 

Theory and practice of computing on electronic machines, Monte 
Carlo method. Von Neumann s interest in numerical work had differ 
ent sources. One stemmed from his original work on the role of 
formalism in mathematical logic and set-theory, and his youthful 
work was concerned extensively with Hilbert s program of consider 
ing mathematics as a finite game. Another equally strong motivation 
came from his work in problems of mathematical physics including 
the purely theoretical work on ergodic theory in classical physics and 
his contributions to quantum theory. A growing exposure to the more 
practical problems encountered in hydrodynamics and in the mani 
fold problems of mechanics of continua arising in the technology of 
nuclear energy led directly to problems of computation. 

We have already briefly discussed his interest in the problems of 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 31 

turbulence, general dynamics of continua, and meteorological calcula 
tions. 

I remember quite well how, very early in the Los Alamos Project, 
it became obvious that analytical work alone was often not sufficient 
to provide even qualitative answers. The numerical work by hand 
and even the use of desk computing machines would require a pro 
hibitively long time for these problems. This situation seemed to 
provide the final spur for von Neumann to engage himself energeti 
cally in the work on methods of computation utilizing the electronic 
machines. 

For several years von Neumann had felt that in many problems of 
hydrodynamics in propagation and the behavior of shocks, and 
generally in cases where the non-linear partial differential equations 
describing the phenomena had to be applied in instances involving 
large displacements (that is to say, in cases where linearization would 
not adequately approximate the true description) numerical work 
was necessary to provide heuristic material for a future theory. 

This final necessity compelled him to examine, from its foundations, 
the problem of computing on electronic machines and, during 1944 
and 1945, he formulated the now fundamental methods of translating 
a set of mathematical procedures into a language of instructions for a 
computing machine. The electronic machines of that time (e.g., the 
Eniac) lacked the flexibility and generality which they now possess 
in the handling of mathematical problems. Speaking broadly, each 
problem required a special and different system of wiring, in order 
to enable the machine to perform the prescribed operations in a given 
sequence. Von Neumann s great contribution was the idea of a fixed 
and rather universal set of connections or circuits in the machine, a 
"flow diagram," and a "code" so as to enable a fixed set of connec 
tions in the machine to have the means of solving a very great variety 
of problems. While, a priori at least, the possibility of such an ar 
rangement might be obvious to mathematical logicians, the execution 
and practice of such a universal method was far from obvious with 
the then existing electronic technology. 

It is easy to underestimate, even now, ten years after the inception 
of such methods, the great possibilities opened through such theoreti 
cal experimentation in problems of mathematical physics. The field 
is still new and it seems risky to make prophesies, but the already 
accumulated mass of theoretical experiments in hydrodynamics, 
magneto-hydrodynamics, and quantum-theoretical calculations, etc., 
allow one to hope that good syntheses may arise from these computa 
tions. 



32 S. ULAM 

The engineering of the computing machines owes a great deal to 
von Neumann. The logical schemata of the machines, the planning 
of the relative roles of their memory, their speed, the selection of 
fundamental "orders" and their circuits in the present machines bear 
heavily the imprint of his ideas. Von Neumann himself supervised 
the construction of a machine at the Institute for Advanced Study 
in Princeton, so as to have an acquaintance with the engineering 
problems involved and at the same time to have at hand this tool for 
novel experimentation. Even before the machine was finished, which 
took longer than anticipated, he was involved in setting up and 
executing enormous computations arising in certain problems at the 
Los Alamos Laboratory. One of these, the problem of following the 
course of a thermonuclear reaction, involved more than a billion of 
elementary arithmetical operations and elementary logical orders. 
The problem was to find a "yes" or "no" answer to the question of 
propagation of a reaction. One was not concerned with providing the 
final data with great accuracy but, in order to obtain an answer to 
the original question, all the intermediate and detailed computations 
seemed necessary. It is true that guessing the behavior of certain 
elements of the problem, together with hand calculations, could in 
deed throw considerable light on the final answer. In order to increase 
the degree of confidence in estimates thus obtained by intuition, an 
enormous amount of computational work had to be undertaken. This 
seems to be rather common in some new problems of mathematical 
physics and of modern technology. Astronomical accuracy is not re 
quired in the description of the phenomena; in some cases, one would 
be satisfied with predicting the behavior "up to 10 percent" and yet 
during the course of the calculations, the individual steps have to be 
kept as accurate as possible. The enormous number of elementary 
steps then poses the problem of estimating the reliability of final re 
sults and problems on the intrinsic stability of mathematical methods 
and their computational execution. 

In receiving the Fermi prize of the Atomic Energy Commission, 
von Neumann was cited especially for his contribution to the de 
velopment of computing on the electronic machines, so useful in 
many aspects of nuclear science and technology. 

The electronic computing machines with their speed of computa 
tion surpassing that of the hand calculations by a factor of many 
thousands invite the invention of entirely new methods not only in 
numerical analysis in the classical sense, but in the very foundations 
of procedures of mathematical analysis itself. Nobody was more 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 33 

aware of these implications than von Neumann. A small example of 
what we mean here can be illustrated by the so-called Monte Carlo 
Method. The methods of numerical analysis as developed in the past 
for hand work, or even for the relay machines, are not necessarily 
optimal for computations on the electronic machines. So, for example, 
it is obvious that instead of employing tables of elementary functions, 
it is more economical to compute the desired values directly. Next, 
it is clear that the procedures of integration of equations by reduction 
to quadratures, etc., can now be circumvented by schemes so com 
plicated arithmetically that they could not even be considered for 
hand work, but which are very feasible on the new machines. Literally 
dozens of computational tricks, "subroutines," e.g., for calculating 
elementary algebraical or transcendental functions, for solving of 
auxiliary equations, etc. were produced by von Neumann during the 
years following the World War. Some of this work, by the way, is 
not as yet generally available to the mathematical public, but is 
more widely known among the now numerous technological and 
scientific groups utilizing the computing machines in industrial or 
government projects. This work includes methods for finding eigen 
values and inversion of matrices, methods for economical search for 
extrema of functions of several variables, production of random 
digits, etc. Much of this exhibits the typical combinatorial dexterity, 
in some cases, of virtuoso quality, of his early work in mathematical 
logic and algebraical studies in operator theory. 

The simplicity of mathematical formulation of the principles of 
mathematical physics hoped for in the nineteenth century seems to be 
conspicuously absent in modern theories. A perplexing variety and 
wealth of structure found in what one considered as elementary 
particles, seem to postpone the hopes for an early mathematical syn 
thesis. In applied physics and in technology one is forced to deal with 
situations which, mathematically, present mixtures of different sys 
tems: For example, in addition to a system of particles whose be 
havior is governed by equations of mechanics, there are interacting 
electrical fields, described by partial differential equations; or, in the 
study of behavior of neutron-producing assemblies, one has, in addi 
tion to a system of neutrons, the hydrodynamical and the thermo- 
dynamical properties of the whole system interacting with the dis 
crete assembly of these particles. 

From the point of view of combinatorics alone, not to mention the 
difficulties of analysis in the handling of several partial differential 
and integral equations, it is clear that at the present time, there is 



34 S. ULAM 

very little hope of finding solutions in a closed form. In order to find, 
even only qualitatively, the properties of such systems, one is forced to 
look for pragmatic methods. 

We decided to look for ways to find, as it were, homomorphic 
images of the given physical problem in a mathematical schema which 
could be represented by a system of fictitious "particles" treated by 
an electronic computer. It is especially in problems involving func 
tions of a considerable number of independent variables that such 
procedures would be applied. To give a very simple concrete example 
of such a Monte Carlo approach, let us consider the question of 
evaluating the volume of a subregion of a given w-dimensional "cube" 
described by a set of inequalities. Instead of the usual method of ap 
proximating the volume required by a systematic subdivision of the 
space into its lattice points one could select, at random, with uniform 
probability, a number of points in space and determine (on the 
machine) how many of these points belong to the given region. This 
proportion will give us, according to elementary facts of probability 
theory, an approximate value of the relative volumes, with the prob 
ability as close to one as we wish, by employing a sufficient number of 
sample points. As a somewhat more complicated example, consider 
the problem of diffusion in a region of space bounded by surfaces 
which partly reflect and partly absorb the diffusing particles. If the 
geometry of the region is complicated, it might be more economical 
to try to perform "physically" a large number of such random walks 
rather than to try to solve the integro-differential equations clas 
sically. These "walks" can be performed conveniently on machines 
and such a procedure in fact reverses the treatment which in prob 
ability theory reduces the study of random walks to the study of 
differential equations. 

Another instance of such methodology is, given a set of functional 
equations, to attempt to transform it into an equivalent one which 
would admit of a probabilistic or game theory interpretation. This 
latter would allow one to play, on a machine, the games illustrating 
the random processes and the distributions obtained would give a fair 
idea of the solution of the original equations. Better still, the hope 
would be to obtain directly a "homomorphic image" of the behavior 
of the physical system in question. It has to be stated that in many 
physical problems presently considered, the differential equations 
originally obtained by certain idealizations, are not, so to say, very 
sacrosanct any more. A direct study of models of the system on 
computing machines may possess a heuristic value, at least. A great 
number of problems were treated in this fashion towards the end of 
the war and in following years by von Neumann and the writer. At 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 35 

first, the probabilistic interpretation was immediately suggested by 
the physical situation itself. Later, problems of the third class men 
tioned above were studied. A theory of such mathematical models is 
still very incomplete. In particular, estimates of fluctuations and 
accuracy are not as yet developed. Here again, von Neumann con 
tributed a large number of ingenious ways, for example by playing 
suitable games, of producing sequences of numbers in the given 
probability distributions. He also devised probabilistic models for 
treatment of the Boltzmann equation and important stochastic 
models for some strictly deterministic problems in hydrodynamics. 
Much of this work is scattered throughout various laboratory reports 
or is still in manuscript. One certainly hopes that in the near future, 
an organized selection will be available to the mathematical public. 

Theory of automata, probabilistic logic. An account of this work 
is given in Professor Shannon s article, Von Neumanns contributions 
to automata theory. This work, like that in game theory, has stimu 
lated, during the last few years, a wide and increasingly expanding 
number of studies and seems to me to rank with his most fertile 
ideas. Here a combination of his interest in mathematical logic, com 
puting machines, mathematical analysis, and the knowledge of prob 
lems of mathematical physics, come to bear fruit in new construc 
tions. The ideas of Turing, McCulloch, and Pitts on the representation 
of logical propositions by electrical networks or idealized nervous 
systems inspired him to propose and outline a general theory of 
automata. Its notions and terminology come from several fields 
mathematics, electrical engineering, and neurology. Such studies now 
promise more conquests of mathematics in its ability to formalize, 
perhaps at first on an extremely simplified level, the workings of an 
organism and of the nervous system itself. 

Nuclear energy, work at Los Alamos. The discovery of the phe 
nomenon of fission in uranium caused by absorption of neutrons with 
a consequent release of more neutrons came just before the outbreak 
of the Second World War. A number of physicists realized at once 
the possibility of a vast release of energy in an exponential reaction 
in a mass of uranium, and discussions started on quantitative evalua 
tion of arrangements which would lead to utilization of this new 
source of energy. 

Theoretical physicists form a much smaller and more closely knit 
group than mathematicians and, in general, the interchange of re 
sults and ideas is more rapid among them. Von Neumann, whose 
work in foundations of quantum theory brought him early into con 
tact with most of the leading physicists, was aware of the new experi- 



36 S. ULAM 

mental facts and participated, from the beginning, in their specula 
tions on the enormous technological possibilities latent in the phe 
nomena of fission. The outbreak of war found him already engaged in 
scientific work connected with problems of defense. It was not until 
late in 1943, however, that he was asked by Oppenheimer to visit the 
Los Alamos Laboratory as a consultant and began to participate in 
the work which was to culminate in the construction of the atomic 
bomb. 

As is now well known, the first self-sustaining nuclear chain reac 
tion was established by a group of physicists headed by Fermi in 
Chicago on December 2, 1942, through the construction of a pile, 
an arrangement of uranium and a moderating substance where the 
neutrons are slowed down in order to increase their probability of 
causing further fissions. A pile forms a very large object and the time 
for the ^-folding of the number of neutrons is relatively long. The 
project established at Los Alamos had as its aim to produce a very 
fast reaction in a relatively small amount of the 235 isotope of 
uranium or plutonium, leading to an explosive release of a vast 
amount of energy. The scientific group began to assemble in late 
spring of 1943 and by fall of that year a great number of eminent 
theoretical and experimental physicists were settled there. When von 
Neumann arrived in Los Alamos, diverse methods of assembling a 
critical mass of fissionable material were being examined ; no scheme 
was a priori certain of success, one of the problems being whether a 
sufficiently fast assembly is possible before the nuclear reaction 
would lead to a mild or mediocre explosion preventing the utilization 
of most of the material. 

E. Teller remembers how Johnny arrived in Lamy (the railroad 
station nearest Los Alamos), was brought up to the "hill," sur 
rounded at that time by great secrecy, in an official car: 

"When he arrived, the Coordinating Council was just in session. Our Director, Oppen 
heimer, was reporting on the Ottawa meeting in Canada. His speech contained lots of 
references to most important people and equally important decisions, one of which affected 
us closely: We could expect the arrival of the British contingent in the near future. After 
he finished the speech he asked whether there were any questions or comments. The audi 
ence was impressed and no questions were asked. Then Oppenheimer suggested that 
there might be questions on some other topics. After a second or two a deep voice (whose 
source has been lost to history} spoke, When shall we have a shoemaker on the Hill? 
Even though no scientific problem was discussed with Johnny at that time, he asserted 
that as of that moment he was fully familiar with the nature of Los Alamos." 

The atmosphere of work was extremely intense at that time and 
more characteristic of university seminars than technological or engi 
neering laboratories by its informality and the exploratory and, one 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 190: 37 

might say, abstract character of scientific discussions. I remember 
rather vividly that it was with some astonishment that I found, upon 
arriving at Los Alamos, a milieu reminiscent of a group of mathe 
maticians discussing their abstract speculations rather than of engi 
neers working on a well defined practical project discussions were 
going on informally often until late at night. Scientifically, a striking 
feature of the situation was the diversity of problems, each equally 
important for the success of the project. For example, there was the 
problem of the distribution, in space and time, of the neutrons whose 
number increases exponentially; equally important was the problem 
of following the increasing deposition of energy by fissions in the 
material of the bomb, the calculation of hydrodynamical motions in 
the explosion, the distribution of energy in the form of radiation, and 
finally, following the course of the motions of the material sur 
rounding the bomb after it has lost its criticality. It was vital to 
understand all these questions which involved very different mathe 
matical problems. 

It is impossible to detail here the contributions of von Neumann; 
I shall try to indicate some of the more important ones. Early in 1944 
a method of implosion was considered for the assembly of the fission 
able material. This involves a spherical impulse given to the material, 
followed by the compression. Von Neumann, Bethe, and Teller were 
the first to recognize the advantages of this scheme. Teller told him 
about the experimental work of Neddermeyer and collaborated with 
von Neumann on working out the essential consequences of such 
spherical geometry. Von Neumann came to the conclusion that one 
could produce exceedingly great pressures by this method and it 
became clear in the discussion that great pressures would bring about 
considerable compressions as well. In order to start the implosion in a 
sufficiently symmetrical manner, the original push given by high 
explosives had to be delivered by simultaneously detonating it from 
many points. Tuck and von Neumann suggested that it be supple 
mented by the use of high explosive lenses. 

\Ve mentioned before von Neumann s ability, perhaps somewhat 
rare among mathematicians, to commune with the physicists, under 
stand their language, and to transform it almost instantly into a 
mathematician s schemes and expressions. Then, after following the 
problems as such, he could translate them back into expressions in 
common use among physicists. 

The first attempts to calculate the motions resulting from an im 
plosion were extremely schematic. The equations of state of the mate 
rials involved were only imperfectly known, but even with crude 



38 S. ULAM 

mathematical approximations one was led to equations whose solu 
tion was beyond the scope of explicit analytical methods. It became 
obvious that extensive and tedious numerical work was necessary in 
order to obtain quantitatively correct results and it is in this connec 
tion that computing machines appeared as a necessary aid. 

A still more complicated problem is that of the calculation of the 
characteristics of the nuclear explosion. The amount of energy 
liberated in it depends on the history of the outward motions which 
are, of course, governed by the rate of energy deposition and by the 
thermodynamic properties of the material and radiation at the very 
high temperatures which are generated. One had to be satisfied for 
the first experiment with approximate calculations; however, as men 
tioned before, even the order of magnitude is not easy to estimate 
without intricate computations. After the end of the war the desire to 
economize on the material and to maximize its utilization prompted 
the need for much more precise calculations. Here again von Neu 
mann s contributions to the mathematical treatment of the resulting 
physical questions were considerable. 

Already during the war, the possibilities of thermonuclear reactions 
were considered, at first only in discussions, then in preliminary cal 
culations. Von Neumann participated actively as a member of an 
imaginative group which considered various schemes for making pos 
sible such reactions on a large scale. The problems involved in treat 
ing the conditions necessary for such a reaction and in following its 
course are even more complex mathematically than those attending 
a fission explosion (whose characteristics are indeed a prerequisite for 
following the larger problem). After one discussion in which we out 
lined the course of such a calculation, von Neumann turned to me 
and said, "Probably in its execution we shall have to perform more 
elementary arithmetical steps than the total in all the computations 
performed by the human race heretofore." We noticed, however, 
that the total number of multiplications made by the school children 
of the world in the course of a few years sensibly exceeded that of 
our problem! 

Limitations of space make it impossible to give an account of the 
innumerable smaller technical contributions of von Neumann wel 
comed by physicists and engineers engaged in this project. 

Von Neumann was very adept in performing dimensional estimates 
and algebraical and numerical computations in his head without 
using a pencil and paper. This ability, perhaps somewhat akin to the 
talent of playing chess blindfolded, often impressed physicists. My 
impression was that von Neumann did not visualize the physical ob- 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 39 

jects under consideration but rather treated their properties as logical 
consequences of the fundamental physical assumptions; but he was 
able to play a deductive game with these astonishingly well! 

One trait of his scientific personality, which made him very much 
liked and sought after by those engaged in applications of mathe 
matical techniques, was a willingness to listen attentively even to 
questions sometimes without much scientific import, but presenting 
the combinatorial attractions of a puzzle. Many of his interlocutors 
were helped actively or else consoled by knowing that there is no 
magic in mathematics known to anyone containing easy answers to 
their problems. His unselfish willingness to be involved in perhaps 
too diverse and certainly too numerous activities where mathemati 
cal insight might be useful (they are so increasingly common in tech 
nology nowadays) put severe demands on his time. In the years fol 
lowing the end of the Second World War, he found himself torn be 
tween conflicting demands on his time almost every moment. 

Von Neumann strongly believed that the technological revolution 
initiated by the release of nuclear energy would cause more profound 
changes in human society, in particular in the development of sci 
ence, than any technological discovery made in the previous history 
of the race. In one of the very few instances of talking about his own 
lucky guesses, he told me that, as a very young man, he believed that 
nuclear energy would be made available and change the order of 
human activities during his lifetime! 

He participated actively in the early speculations and deliberations 
on the possibility of controlled thermonuclear reactions. When in 1954 
he became a member of the Atomic Energy Commission, he worked 
on the technical and economical problems relating to the building 
and operation of fission reactors. In this position he also spent a great 
deal of time in the organization of studies of mathematical computing 
machines and the means to make them available to universities and 

other research centers. 

* * * 

This fragmentary account of von Neumann s diverse achievements 
and this cursory peregrination through the mathematical disciplines 
in which he left so many permanent imprints, may raise the question 
whether there was a thread of continuity throughout his work. 

As Poincare has phrased it: "II y a des problemes qu on se pose et 
des problemes qui se posent." Now, fifty years after the great French 
mathematician formulated this indefinite distinction, the state of 
mathematics presents this division in a more acute form. Many more 
of the objects considered by mathematicians are their own free crea- 



40 S. ULAM 

tions, often, so to say, special generalizations of previous construc 
tions. These are sometimes originally inspired by the schemata of 
physics, others evolve genetically from free mathematical creations 
in some cases prophetically anticipating the actual patterns of physi 
cal relations. Von Neumann s thought was obviously influenced by 
both tendencies. It was his desire to preserve, so far as possible, the 
connection between the pyramiding mathematical constructions and 
the increasing combinatorial complexity presented by physics and 
the natural sciences in general, a connection which seems to be grow 
ing more and more elusive. 

Some of the great mathematicians of the eighteenth century, in 
particular Euler, succeeded in incorporating into the domain of 
mathematical analysis descriptions of many natural phenomena. Von 
Neumann s work attempted to cast in a similar role the mathe 
matics stemming from set theory and modern algebra. This is of 
course, nowadays, a vastly more difficult undertaking. The in 
finitesimal calculus and the subsequent growth of analysis through 
most of the nineteenth century led to hopes of not merely cataloguing, 
but of understanding the contents of the Pandora s box opened by 
the discoveries of physical sciences. Such hopes are now illusory, if 
only because the real number system of the Euclidean space can no 
longer claim, algebraically, or even only topologically, to be the 
unique or even the best mathematical substratum for physical 
theories. The physical ideas of the 19th century, dominated mathe 
matically by differential and integral equations and the theory of 
analytic functions, have become inadequate. The new quantum 
theory requires on the analytic side a set-theoretically more general 
point of view, the primitive notions themselves involving probability 
distributions and infinite-dimensional function spaces. The al 
gebraical counterpart to this involves a study of combinatorial and 
algebraic structures more general than those presented by real or 
complex numbers alone. Von Neumann s work came at a time when 
the whole complex of ideas stemming from Cantor s set theory and 
the algebraical work of Hilbert, Weyl, Noether, Artin, Brauer, and 
others could be exploited for this purpose. 

Another major source from which general mathematical investiga 
tions are beginning to develop is a new kind of combinatorial analysis 
stimulated by the recent fundamental researches in the biological 
sciences. Here, the lack of general method at the present time is even 
more noticeable. The problems are essentially non-linear, and of an 
extremely complex combinatorial character; it seems that many 
years of experimentation and heuristic studies will be necessary be- 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 41 

fore one can hope to achieve the insight required for decisive syn 
theses. An awareness of this is what prompted von Neumann to de 
vote so much of his work of the last ten years to the study and the 
construction of computing machines and to formulate a preliminary 
outline for the study of automata. 

Surveying von Neumann s work and seeing how ramified and ex 
tended it is, one could say with Hilbert: "One is led to ask oneself 
whether the science of mathematics will not end, as has been the 
case for a long time now for other sciences, in a subdivision of sepa 
rate parts whose representatives will barely understand each other 
and whose connections will continue to diminish? I neither think so 
nor hope for this; the science of mathematics is an indivisible whole, 
an organism whose vital force has as its premise the indissolubility 
of its parts. Whatever the diversity of subjects of our science in its 
details, we are nonetheless struck by the equivalence of the logical 
procedures, the relation of ideas in the whole of science and the nu 
merous analogies in its different domains . . . ." u Von Neumann s 
work was a contribution to this ideal of the universality and organic 

unity of mathematics. 

* * * 

Among the numerous scientific positions held by von Neumann, 
one should name his Gibbs Lectureship in the American Mathemati 
cal Society (1947); he gave the American Mathematical Society 
Colloquium Lecture in 1937 and was Vanuxem Lecturer at Princeton 
University in 1953. He was president of the American Mathematical 
Society from 1951-1953. During his years as a professor at the In 
stitute in Princeton, he gave lectures, too numerous to list, at various 
learned societies and academic institutions. 

He served as a co-editor of the Annals of Mathematics in Princeton 
from 1933-1957, and of Compositio Mathematica (Amsterdam, 
Netherlands) from 1935-1957. 

The society memberships included: American Mathematical So 
ciety; American Physical Society; Econometric Society; Interna 
tional Statistical Institute, The Hague, Netherlands; Sigma Xi. 
He was a member of the following academies: 

Academia Nacional de Ciencias Exactas, Lima, Peru ; 

Academia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rome, Italy; 

American Academy of Arts and Sciences; 

American Philosophical Society; 

Institute Lombardo di Scienze e Lettere, Milano, Italy; 

14 Hilbert: Problemes futurs des Mathematiques, Comptes-Rendus, 2eme Congres 
International de Mathematiques, Paris, 1900. 



42 S. ULAM 

National Academy of Sciences; 

Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences and Letters, Amster 
dam, Netherlands. 

He was awarded the following Honorary Doctors degrees: Prince 
ton University, 1947; University of Pennsylvania and Harvard Uni 
versity, 1950; University of Istanbul, Turkey, and University of 
Maryland, 1950, also Columbia University and the Technische 
Hochschule in Munich. 

Among the distinctions and honors received : 

Rockefeller Fellowship 1926; 

Bocher Prize, American Mathematical Society 1937; 

Medal for Merit (Presidential Award), distinguished Civilian 
Service Award, U. S. Navy 1947; 

Medal of Freedom (Presidential Award) 1956; 

Albert Einstein Commemorative Award 1956; 

Enrico Fermi Award 1956. 

An incomplete list of scientific and organizational activities con 
tains the following positions: From 1940-1957, he was a member of 
the Scientific Advisory Committee, Ballistic Research Laboratories, 
Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland; the Navy Bureau of Ordnance, 
Washington, D. C. from 1941-1955; consultant to Los Alamos Scien 
tific Laboratory 1943-1955; also the Naval Ordnance Laboratory, 
Silver Spring, Maryland from 1947-1955; member of the Research 
and Development Board, Washington, D. C. 1949-1953; a consultant 
to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 1949- 
1954; member from 1950 to 1955 of the Armed Forces Special 
Weapons Project, Washington, D. C.; also in Washington a mejnber 
of the Scientific Advisory Board, U. S. Air Force, Washington, D. C. 
19511957; a member of the General Advisory Committee by presi 
dential appointment 1952-1954; and on the Technical Advisory Panel 
on Atomic Energy, Washington, D. C. 1953-1957; Chairman of the 
Advisory Committee on Guided Missiles (1954-1957 with Clark 
Millikan as acting chairman in 1956), 

APPENDIX 1 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1922 1. Uber die Lage der Nullstellen gewisser Minimumpolynome. With M. 

Fekete. Jber. Deutschen Math. Verein. vol. 31 (1922) pp. 125-138. 

1923 2. Zur Einfiihrung der transfiniten Ordnungszahlen, Acta Univ. Szeged vol. 

1 (1923) pp. 199-208. 

1925 3. Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre, J. Reine Angew. Math. vol. 154 

(1925) pp. 219-240. 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 43 

4. Egyenletesen siirii szamsorozatok, Math. Phys. Lapok vol. 32 (1925) pp. 
32-40. 

1926 5. Zur Priifersclien Theorie der idealen Zahlen, Acta Univ. Szeged vol. 2 

(1926) pp. 193-227. 

6. Az dltdlanos Nalmazelmtlet axio matikus folepitese (Doctor s thesis, Univ. 
of Budapest.) Cf. [18] (1926). 

1927 7. Uber die Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik. With D. Hilbert and L. Xord- 

heim. Math. Ann. vol. 98 (1927) pp. 1-30. 

8. Zur Theorie der Darstellungen kontinuierlicher Gruppen, Preuss. Akad. 
\Viss. Sitzungsber. (1927) pp. 76-90. 

9. Mathematische Begrundung der Quantenmechanik, Xachr. Ges. Wiss. 
Gottingen (1927), pp. 1-57. 

10. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheoretischer Aufbau der Quantenmechanik, Xachr. 
Ges. Wiss. Gottingen (1927) pp. 245-272. 

11. Thermodynamik quantenmechanischer Gesamtheiten, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. 
Gottingen (1927) pp. 273-291. 

12. Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie, Math. Zeit. vol. 26 (1927) pp. 1-46. 

1928 13. Allgemeine Eigenwerttheorie symmetrischer Funktionaloperatoren, "Habi- 

litations-schrift," Univ. of Berlin, 1928, Cf. [30 ]. 

14. Zerlegung des Intervalles in abzahlbar viele kongruente Teilmengen, Fund. 
Math. vol. 11 (1928) pp. 230-238. 

15. Bin System algebraisch unabhdngiger Zahlen, Math. Ann. vol. 99 (1928) 
pp. 134-141. 

16. Uber die Definition durch trans finite Induktion, und verwandte Fragen der 
allgemeinen Mengenlehre, Math. Ann. vol. 99 (1928) pp. 373-391. 

17. Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele, Math. Ann. vol. 100 (1928) pp. 295- 
320. 

18. Die Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre, Math. Zeit. vol. 27 (1928) pp. 
669-752. 

19. Zur Erklarung einige r Eigenschaften der Spektren aus der Quanten- 
mechanik des Drehelektrons, I. With E. Wigner. Zschr. f. Phys. vol. 47 
(1928) pp. 203-220. 

20. Einige Bemerkungen zur Diracschen Theorie des Drehelektrons, Zschr. 
f. Phys. vol. 48 (1928) pp. 868-881. 

21. Zur Erklarung einiger Eigenschaften der Spektren aus der Quanten 
mechanik des Drehelektrons, II. With E. Wigner. Zschr. f. Phys. vol. 49 
(1928) pp. 73-94. Cf. [19]. 

22. Zur Erklarung einiger Eigenschaften der Spektren aus der Quanten 
mechanik des Drehelektrons, III. With E. Wigner. Zschr. f. Phys. vol. 51 
(1928) pp. 844-858. Cf. [19]. 

1929 23. Uber eine Wider spruchfreiheitsf rage der axiomatischen Mengenlehre, J. 

Reine Angew. Math. vol. 160 (1929) pp. 227-241. 

24. Uber die analytischen Eigenschaften von Gruppen linearer Transforma- 
twnen und ihrer Darstellungen, Math. Zeit. vol. 30 (1929) pp. 3-i2. 

25. Uber merkiviirdige diskrete Eigenwerte. With E. Wigner. Phys. Zschr. 
vol. 30 (1929) pp. 465-167. 

26. Uber das Verhalten von Eigenwerten bei adiabatischen Prozessen. With E. 
Wigner. Phys. Zschr. vol. 30 (1929) pp. 467^70. 

27. Beweis des Ergodensatzes und des H-Theorems in der neuen Mechanik. 
Zschr. f. Phys. vol. 57 (1929) pp. 30-70. 



44 S. ULAM 

28. Zur allgemeinen Theorie des Masses, Fund. Math. vol. 13 (1929) pp. 73- 
116. 

29. Zusatz zur Arbeit "Zur allgemeinen ..." Fund. Math. vol. 13 (1929) p. 
333. Cf. [28]. 

30. AUgemeine Eigenwerttheorie Hermitescher Funktionaloperatoren. Math. 
Ann. vol. 102 (1929) pp. 49-131. 

31. Zur Algebra der Funktionaloperatoren und Theorie der normalen Oper- 
atoren, Math. Ann. vol. 102 (1929) pp. 370-427. 

32. Zur Theorie der unbeschrankten Matrizen, J. Reine Angew Math. vol. 161 
(1929) pp. 208-236. 

1930 33. Uber einen Hilfssatz der Variationsrechnung, Abh. Math. Sem. Hansi- 

schen Univ. vol. 8 (1930) pp. 28-31. 

1931 34. Uber Funktionen von Funktionaloperatoren, Ann. Math. vol. 32 (1931) 

pp. 191-226. 

35. Algebraische Reprdsentanten der Funktionen "bis auf eine Menge vom 

Uaasse Null" J. Reine Angew. Math. vol. 161 (1931) pp. 109-115. 

36. Die Eindeutigkeit der Schrodingerschen Operatoren, Math. Ann. vol. 104 

(1931) pp. 570-578. 

37. Bemerkungen zu den Ausfiihrungen von Herrn St. Lesniewski uber meine 
Arbeit u Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie," Fund. Math. vol. 17 (1931) pp. 
331-334. 

38. Die formal istische Grundlegung der Mathematik. Report to the Congress, 
Konigsberg, Sept. 1931. Erkenntniss, 2, pp. 116-121. 

1932 39. Zum Beweise des Minkowskischen Satzes iiber Linearformen, Math. Zeit. 

vol. 30 (1932) pp. 1-2. 

40. Uber adjungierte Funktionaloperatoren, Ann. of Math. vol. 33 (1932) pp. 
294-310. 

41. Proof of the quasi-ergodic hypothesis, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 18 

(1932) pp. 70-82. 

42. Physical applications of the quasi-ergodic hypothesis, Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. vol. 18 (1932) pp. 263-266. 

43. Dynamical systems of continuous spectra. With B. O. Koopman. Proc. 
Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 18 (1932) pp. 255-263. 

44. Uber einen Satz von Herrn M. H. Stone, Ann. of Math. vol. 33 (1932) pp. 
567-573. 

45. Einige Sdtze uber messbare Abbildungen, Ann. of Math. vol. 33 (1932) 
pp. 574-586. 

46. Zur Operatorenmethode in der klassischen Mechanik, Ann. of Math. vol. 
33 (1932) pp. 587-642. 

47. Zusatze zur Arbeit u Zur Operatorenmethode . . . ", Ann. of Math. vol. 33 
(1932) pp. 789-791. Cf. [46]. 

47a. Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, J. Springer, Berlin, 
1932; Dover Publications, New York, 1943; Presses Universitaires de 
France, 1947; Institute de Mathematicas "Jorge Juan," Madrid, 1949; 
Translation from German ed. by Robert T. Beyer, Princeton University 
Press, 1955. 

1933 48. Die Einfilhrung analytischer Parameter in topologischen Gruppen, Ann. of 

Math. vol. 34 (1933) pp. 170-190. 

49. A koordindta-meres pontossdganak hatdrai az elektron Dirac-fele elmelete- 
ben (Uber die Grenzen der Koordinatenmessungs-Genauigkeit in der 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 45 

Diracschen Theorie des Elektrons), Mat. es Termeszettud . . . Ertesito 
vol. 50 (1933) pp. 366-385. 

1934 50. On an algebraic generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism. With 

P. Jordan and E. Wigner. Ann. of Math. vol. 35 (1934) pp. 29-64. 

51. Zum Haarschen Maassintopologischen Gruppen, Compositio Math. vol. 1 
(1934) pp. 106-114. 

52. Almost periodic functions in a group. I, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 36 
(1934) pp. 445-492. 

53. The Dirac equation in projective relativity. With A. H. Taub and O. 
Veblen. Proc. Xat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 20 (1934) pp. 383-388. 

1935 54. On complete topological spaces, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 37 (1935) 

pp. 1-20. 

55. Almost periodic functions in groups. II. With S. Bochner. Trans. Amer. 
Math. Soc. vol. 37 (1935) pp. 21-50. 

56. On compact solutions of operational-differential equations. I. With S. 
Bochner. Ann. of Math. vol. 36 (1935) pp. 255-291. 

57. Charakterisierung des Spektrums eines Integraloperators. Actualites 
Scientifiques et Industrielles Series, 229. Exposes Math, publics a la 
memoire de J. Herbrand, no. 13, Paris, 1935, 20 pp. 

58. On normal operators. Proc. Xat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 21 (1935) pp. 366- 
369. 

59. On inner products in linear, metric spaces. With P. Jordan. Ann. of Math, 
vol. 36 (1935) pp. 719-723. 

60. The determination of representative elements in the residual classes of a 
Boolean algebra. With M. H. Stone. Fund. Math. vol. 25 (1935) pp. 
353-378. 

1936 61. On a certain topology for rings of operators, Ann. of Math. vol. 37 (1936) 

pp. 111-115. 

62. On rings of operators. With F. J. Murray. Ann. of Math. vol. 37 (1936) 
pp. 116-229. 

63. On an algebraic generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism (Part 
I). Rec. Math (Mat. Sbornik) X. S. vol. 1 (1936) pp. 415-484. 

64. The uniqueness of Haar s measure, Rec. Math (Mat. Sbornik) X*. S. vol. 
1 (1936) pp. 721-734. 

65. The logic of quantum mechanics. With G. Birkhoff. Ann. of Math. vol. 37 
(1936) pp. 823-843. 

66. Continuous geometry, Proc. Xat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 22 (1936) pp. 
92-100. 

67. Examples of continuous geometries, Proc. Xat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 22 
(1936) pp. 101-108. 

68. On regular rings. Proc. Xat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 22 (1936) pp. 707- 
713. 

1937 69. On some analytic sets defined by transfinite induction. With C. Kuratow- 

ski. Ann. of Math, vol/38 (1937) pp. 521-525. 

70. On rings of operators, II. With F. J. Murray. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 
vol. 41 (1937) pp. 208-248. 

71. Seme matrix-inequalities and metrization of matrix-space. Tomck. Univ. 
Rev. vol. 1 (1937) pp. 286-300. 

72. Uber ein okonomisches Gleichungssystem und eine Verallgemeinerung des 



46 S. ULAM 

Brouwerschen Fixpunktsatzes, Erg. eines Math. Coll., Vienna, edited by 
K. Menger, vol. 8, 1937, pp. 73-83. 

73. Algebraic theory of continuous geometries, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
vol. 23 (1937) pp. 16-22. 

74. Continuous rings and their arithmetics, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 
23 (1937) pp. 341-349. 

1938 75. On infinite direct products, Compositio Math. vol. 6 (1938) pp. 1-77. 

1940 76. On the transitivity of perspective mappings. With I. Halperin. Ann. of 

Math. vol. 41 (1940) pp. 87-93. 

77. On rings of operators, III, Ann. of Math. vol. 41 (1940) pp. 94-161. 

78. Minimally almost periodic groups. With E. Wigner. Ann. of Math. vol. 
41 (1940) pp. 746-750. 

78a. The estimation of the probable error from succesive differences. With 
R. H. Kent. Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., Report No. 175, 1940, 19 
pp. 

1941 79. The mean square successive difference. With R. H. Kent, H. R. Bellinson 

and B. I. Hart. Ann. Math. Statist, vol. 12 (1941) pp. 153-162. 

80. Fourier integrals and metric geometry. With I. J. Schoenberg. Trans. 
Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 50 (1941) pp. 226-251. 

81. Distribution of the ratio of the mean square successive difference to the 
variance, Ann. Math. Statist, vol. 12 (1941) pp. 367-395. 

1 942 82. A further remark concerning the distribution of the ratio of the mean square 

successive difference to the variance, Ann. Math. Statist, vol. 13 (1942) pp. 
86-88. 

83. Operator methods in classical mechanics, II. With P. R. Halmos. Ann. of 
Math. vol. 43 (1942) pp. 332-350. 

84. The statistics of the gravitational field arising from a random distribution 
of stars, I. With S. Chandrasekhar. The Astrophysical Journal vol. 95 

(1942) pp. 489-531. 

85. Tabulation of the probabilities for the ratio of the mean square successive 
difference to the variance. By B. I. Hart, with a note by J. von Neumann. 
Ann. Math. Statist, vol. 13 (1942) pp. 207-214. 

86. Approximative properties of matrices of high finite order, Portugaliae 
Mathematica vol. 3 (1942) pp. 1-62. 

1943 87. On rings of operators, IV. With F. J. Murray. Ann. of Math. vol. 44 

(1943) pp. 716-808. 

88. The statistics of the gravitational field arising from a random distribution 
of stars. II. The speed of fluctuations , dynamical friction-, spatial correla 
tions. With S. Chandrasekhar. The Astrophysical Journal vol. 97 (1943) 
pp. 1-27. 

89. On some algebraical properties of operator rings, Ann. of Math. vol. 44 
(1943) pp. 709-715. 

1944 90. Theory of games and economic behavior. With O. Morgenstern. Princeton 

University Press (1944, 1947, 1953) 625 pp. 

1945 90a. A model of general economic equilibrium, Rev. Economic Studies, vol. 13 

(1), (1945-1946) pp. 1-9. 

1946 91. Solution of linear systems of high order. With V. Bargmann and D. Mont 

gomery. Report prepared for Navy BuOrd under Contract Nord-9596- 
25, Oct. 1946, 85 pp. 

92. Preliminary discussion of the logical design of an electronic computing 
instrument. Part I, Vol. I. With A. W. Burks and H. H. Goldstine. Re- 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 47 

port prepared for U. S. Army Ord. Dept. under Contract W-36-034- 

ORD-7481 (28 June 1946, 2d ed. September 2, 1947), 42 pp. 
92a. The cross-space of linear transformations. II. With R. Schatten. Ann. of 

Math. vol. 47 (1946) p. 608. 
92b. The cross-space of linear transformations. III. With R. Schatten. Ann. of 

Math. vol. 49 (1948) p. 557. 

1947 93. The Mathematician. "The Works of the Mind." U. of Chicago Press, 

1947, pp. 180-196. 

94. Numerical inverting of matrices of high order. With H. H. Goldstine. 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 53 (1947) pp. 1021-1099. 

95. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument. 
Part II, Vol. I. With H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. Army 
Ord. Dept. under Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481, 1947, 69 pp. 

1948 96. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument. 

Part II, Vol. II. With H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. Army 
Ord. Dept. under Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481, 1948, 68 pp. 

97. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument. 
Part II, Vol. III. With H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. Army 
Ord. Dept. under Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481, 1948, 23 pp. 

98. On the theory of stationary detonation waves, File Xo. XI 22, September 20, 

1948, BRL, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Md., 26 pp. 

1949 99. On rings of operators. Reduction theory, Ann. of Math. vol. 50 (1949) 

pp. 401-485. 

1950 100. A method for the numerical calculation of hydrodynamic shocks. With 

R. D. Richtmyer. Journal of Applied Physics vol. 21 (1950) pp. 232-237. 

101. Functional Operators Vol. I: Measures and Integrals, Ann. of Math. 
Studies, no. 21, 261 pp.; Vol. II: The geometry of orthogonal spaces, Ann. 
of Math. Studies, no. 22, 107 pp., Princeton University Press, 1950. 

102. Solutions of games by differential equations. With G. W. Brown, "Con 
tributions to the Theory of Games," Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 24, 
Princeton University Press, 1950, pp. 73-79. 

103. Statistical treatment of values of first 2000 decimal digits of e and of Pi 
calculated on the ENIAC. With X. C. Metropolis and G. Reitwiesner. 
Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to Computation vol. 4 (1940) pp. 
109-111. 

104. Numerical integration of the barotropic vorticity equation. With J. G. 
Charney and R. Fjortoft. Tellus 2 (1950) pp. 237-254. 

105. A theorem on unitary representations of semisimple lie groups. With I. E. 
Segal. Ann. of Math. vol. 52 (1950) pp. 509-517. 

1951 106. Eine Spektraltheorie fur allgemeine Operator en eines unitaren Raumes. 

Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen vol. 4 (1950-51) pp. 258-281. 

107. The future of high-speed computing, Proc., Camp. Sem., Dec. 1949, 
published and copyrighted by IBM, 1951, p. 13. 

108. Discussion of the existence and uniqueness or multiplicity of solutions of the 
aerodynamical equations (Chapter 10) of the Problems of Cosmical 
Aerodynamics, Proceedings of the Symposium on the Motion of Gase 
ous Masses of Cosmical Dimensions held at Paris, August 16-19, 1949. 
Central Air Doc. Office, 1951, pp. 75-84. 

109. Numerical inverting of matrices of high order, II. With H. H. Goldstine. 
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 2 (1951) pp. 188-202. 

110. Various techniques used in connection with random digits (Chap. 13) of 



48 S. ULAM 

proceedings of symposium on "Monte Carlo Method" held June-July 
1949 in Los Angeles. Nat l. BuStandards, Applied Math. Series 12, 
June 11, 1951, pp. 36-38. 

111. The general and logical theory of automata. "Cerebral Mechanisms in 
Behavior The Hixon Symposium," September 1948, Pasadena, edited 
by L. A. Jeffress. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1951, pp. 1-31. 

1952 112. Five notes on continuous geometry, Prepared by W. Givens for use of 

participants in seminar at Univ. of Tenn., summer 1952. Includes nos. 
66, 67, 68, 73, 74. 

1953 113. A certain zero-sum two-person game equivalent to the optimal assignment 

problem. "Contributions to the Theory of Games," Vol. II, Ann. of 
Math. Studies, no. 28, Princeton University Press, 1953, pp. 5-12. 
114. Two variants of poker. With D. G. Gillies and J. P. Mayberry. "Contribu 
tions to the Theory of Games," Vol. II. Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 28, 
Princeton University Press 1953, pp. 13-50. 

1954 115. Significance of Loewner s theorem in the quantum theory of collisions. With 

E. P. Wigner. Ann. of Math. vol. 59 (1954) pp. 418-433. 

116. The role of mathematics in the sciences and in society. Address before 
Assoc. of Princeton Graduate Alumni, June 16, 1954. 

117. A numerical method to determine optimum strategy, Naval Res. Logistics 
Quarterly, vol. 1, no. 2, June, 1954, pp. 109-115. 

118. The NORC and problems in high speed computing. Speech at first pub 
lic showing of IBM Naval Ordnance Research Calculator, December 2, 
1954. 

119. Entwicklung und Ausnutzung neuerer mathematischer Maschinen. 
Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Forschung des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, 
Heft 45. Diisseldorf, September 15, 1954. 

1955 120. Can we survive technology?, Fortune, June, 1955. 

121. On the permutability of self-adjoint operators. With A. Devinatz and 
A. E. Nussbaum. Ann. of Math. vol. 62 (1955) pp. 199-203. 

122. Continued fraction expansion of 2 1/3 . With Bryant Tuckerman. Mathe 
matical Tables and Other Aids to Computation, IX, no. 49, January, 
1955. 

123. Blast wave calculation. With H. H. Goldstine. Communications on Pure 
and Applied Mathematics, vol. VIII (1955) pp. 327-353. 

1956 124. Probabilistic logics and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable 

components. "Automata Studies," edited by C. E. Shannon and J. 
McCarthy, Princeton University Press, 1956, pp. 43-98. 
125. Impact of atomic energy on the physical and chemical sciences. Speech at 
M.I.T. Alumni Day Symposium. Tech. Rev., Nov. 1955, pp. 15-17. 

APPENDIX 2 

ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS PRESENTED TO THE 
AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY 

1. J. von Neumann, Almost periodic functions in a group. I, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 
vol. 40 (1934) p. 224. 

2. - , On complete topological spaces, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 41 (1935) p. 35. 

3. S. Bochner and J. von Neumann, Almost periodic functions in groups. II, Bull. 
Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 41 (1935) p. 35. 



JOHN VON NEUMANN, 1903-1957 49 

4. J. von Neumann, Representations and ray-representations in quantum mechanics, 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 41 (1935) p. 305. 

5. - , On the uniqueness of invariant Lebesgue measures, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 
vol. 42 (1936) p. 343. 

6. I. J. Schoenberg and J. von Neumann, Fourier integrals and metric geometry, 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 42 (1936) p. 632. 

7. F. J. Murray and J. von Neumann, On rings of operators. II, Bull. Amer. Math. 
Soc. vol. 42 (1936) p. 808. 

8. I. Halperin and J. von Neumann, On the transitivity of perspective mappings in 
complemented modular lattices, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 43 (1937) p. 37. 

9. I. J. Schoenberg and J. von Neumann, Fourier integrals and metric geometry, II, 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 45 (1939) p. 79. 

10. P. R. Halmos and J. von Neumann, Operator methods in classical mechanics, II, 
Bull.jAmer. Math. Soc. vol. 47 (1941) p. 696. 

11. S. M. Ulam and J. von Neumann, Random ergodic theorems, Bull. Amer. Math, 
soc. vol. 51 (1945) p. 660. 

12. R. Schatten and J. von Neumann, The cross-space of linear transformations, II, 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 52 (1946) p. 67. 

13. E. R. Lorch and J. von Neumann, On the Euclidean character of the perpendicular 
ity relation, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 53 (1947) p. 489. 

14. S. Ulam and J. von Neumann, On the group of Iwmeomorphisms of the surface of 
the sphere, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 53 (1947) p. 506. 

15. , On combination of stochastic and deterministic processes, Bull. Amer. 

Math. Soc. vol. 53 (1947) p. 1120. 

16. H. H. Goldstine and J. von Neumann, Some estimates on the numerical stability 
of the elimination method for inverting matrices of high order, Bull. Amer. Math. 
Soc. vol. 53 (1947) p. 1123. 

17. R. Schatten and J. von Neumann, The cross-space of linear transformations, III. 
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 54 (1948) p. 637. 

Los ALAMOS SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY 



VON NEUMANN AND LATTICE THEORY 

GARRETT BIRKHOFF 

1. Introduction. John von Neumann s brilliant mind blazed over 
lattice theory like a meteor, during a brief period centering around 
1935-1937. With the aim of interesting him in lattices, I had called 
his attention, in 1933-1934, to the fact that the sublattice generated 
by three subspaces of Hilbert space (or any other vector space) con 
tained 28 subspaces in general, to the analogy between dimension and 
measure, and to the characterization of projective geometries as ir 
reducible, finite-dimensional, complemented modular lattices. 

As soon as the relevance of lattices to linear manifolds in Hilbert 
space was pointed out, he began to consider how he could use lattices 
to classify the factors of operator-algebras. One can get some impres 
sion of the initial impact of lattice concepts on his thinking about this 
classification problem by reading the introduction of [62 j, 1 in which 
a systematic lattice-theoretic classification of the different possibili 
ties was initiated. In particular, he saw that factors of Type Hi gave 
rise to continuous-dimensional modular subspace lattices. 

However, von Neumann was not content with considering lattice 
theory from the point of view of such applications alone. With his 
keen sense for axiomatics, he quickly also made a series of funda 
mental contributions to pure lattice theory. The primary aim of the 
following paragraphs is to sketch these contributions. 2 

2. Continuous geometries. Von Neumann s major contributions to 
lattice theory centered around his concepts of a "continuous geom 
etry" and of a "regular ring." Brief announcements of his ideas ap 
peared in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
[66; 67; 68; 73; 74]. Full expositions were published only as mimeo 
graphed notes (Continuous geometry, Institute for Advanced Study 
Lecture Notes, Spring, 1936; Continuous geometry, 1936-1937, Lec 
ture Notes, Edwards Bros., 1937). See also [65] and [76]. 

One can construct a continuous-dimensional projective geometry 
CG(F) over an arbitrary division ring F, as follows. For any n, the 

Received by the editors January 23, 1958. 

1 References in brackets refer to the Bibliography of John von Neumann, 1903- 
1957 which appears on page 1 of this volume. 

2 Another survey of von Neumann s work on continuous geometry, by Israel Hal- 
perin, will appear in a Hungarian journal. I have borrowed freely from this source, 
and am also indebted to I. Kaplansky and S. Ulam for helpful comments. 




VON NEUMANN AND LATTICE THEORY 51 

subspaces of the 2 n -dimensional vector space over F form a (2 n 1)- 
dimensional projective geometry PG(F, 2 n 1). Moreover 

PG(F, 2 n - 1) 

can be embedded isomorphically in PG(F, 2 n+1 1), with preservation 
of normalized dimension d[x] = (d[x] d[0])/(d[l] d[OJ), where 
7 is the whole space. Further, both are metric spaces under the dis 
tance function 

*-f\ = [*Uy]-[*r\y], 

and the operations P\, U are uniformly continuous (with Lipschitz 
modulus one) in this topology. Hence, the metric completion of these 
spaces is itself a complemented modular lattice, which is irreducible 
and has a "dimension" function 8[x] ranging continuously between 
= S[0] and 1=5[/]. This completion is the continuous geometry 
CG(F) m t factors of Type Hi in Hilbert spaces have invariant subspace 
lattices isomorphic to such continuous geometries. Curiously, the real 
and quaternion continuous geometries are isomorphic. 

Much more difficult is the converse problem, of characterizing the 
class of CG(F) in abstract lattice-theoretic terms. Von Neumann s 
solution of this problem required him to develop many basic new 
ideas. 

First, he gave a very successful abstract treatment of dimension in 
complete complemented modular topological lattices. Dimension is 
determined, up to a positive linear transformation, by the following 
two properties. It is conserved by perspective mappings ("perspec- 
tivities") and ordered by inclusion. By an elaborate and ingenious 
argument, the classes of perspective elements can be proved (in the 
irreducible case) to be isomorphic to the real numbers O^d^ 1 (or to 
the fractions 0, 1/n, 2/n, , 1 for some n). The deepest part of the 
proof concerns the equivalence of perspectivity with "projectivity 
by decomposition" of which a corollary is the transitivity of per 
spectivity. 

3. Regular rings. If n is any positive integer exceeding three, then 
every n-dimensional "abstract" projective geometry is isomorphic 
with the subspace-lattice of an si-dimensional vector space V n (F) 
over a (unique) corresponding division ring F. This is also true of 
Desarguesian plane projective geometries. Von Neumann s partial 
extension of this fundamental result to the continuous-dimensional 
case is a truly remarkable feat of logical analysis and ingenuity. 3 

3 For an analog of the plane Desargues case, see K. D. Fryer and I. Halperin, Acta 
Szeged vol. 20 (1956) pp. 203-249. 



52 GARRETT BIRKHOFF 

He first gave the problem of "coordinatization" (i.e., of introducing 
coordinates) a radically new turn. He replaced the vector space V n (F) 
by the ring of "projectivities" generated by "perspectivities." In the 
finite-dimensional case, this ring is a simple full matrix algebra M n (F) 
= R (modulo scalars; we shall not enter into this qualification). 
PG(F, ri) is then isomorphic with the lattice (R(K) of right-ideals of R. 

In operator theory, direct sums of projective geometries occur as 
well; their projectivities correspond to general semi-simple algebras. 
To generalize this concept to the continuous-dimensional case, von 
Neumann coined a new definition: that of regular ring. 

A regular ring is a ring in which, for every a, an element x exists 
such that axa = a. Regular rings having a finite basis over a division 
ring F are just the "semi-simple" rings of the classical Wedderburn 
theory and so direct sums of simple rings. Any finite-dimensional com 
plemented modular lattice is the direct union of a Boolean algebra, 
with (exceptional) non-Desarguesian geometries, with a direct union 
of Desarguesian geometries. The latter can be represented as the 
lattice (R(R) of right-ideals of the (regular or semi-simple) direct sum 
of the full matrix algebras coordinatizing the Desarguesian geometries 
in question. 

In the general case, von Neumann proved the following basic repre 
sentation theorem. Any complemented modular lattice L having a 
"basis" of w^4 pairwise perspective elements, is isomorphic with the 
lattice (R(R) of all principal right-ideals of a suitable regular ring R. 
This conclusion is the culmination of 140 pages of brilliant and inci 
sive algebra involving entirely novel axioms. Anyone wishing to get 
an unforgettable impression of the razor edge of von Neumann s 
mind, need merely try to pursue this chain of exact reasoning for 
himself realizing that often five pages of it were written down be 
fore breakfast, seated at a living room writing-table in a bathrobe. 

4. Related results. Von Neumann s fertile mind developed new 
technical ideas as needed, in proving the results described above. 
Many of these concern distributivity: the properties of elements dis 
tributive with arbitrary pairs in a complemented modular lattice, 
the distributivity of "independent" elements, and infinite distributiv 
ity. 

The first of these had been analyzed by Ore, who defined the "neu 
tral" elements of a modular lattice as those distributive with any 
other pair. Von Neumann quickly saw that the direct decompositions 
of a complemented modular lattice corresponded to its "neutral" 
elements. The set of these is a Boolean algebra, which he called the 



VON NEUMANN AND LATTICE THEORY 53 

"center." He proved the striking result that the "center" of a comple 
mented modular lattice consists of the elements having unique com 
plements. 

He was also the first to show that, in any Boolean algebra, the join 
and meet operations are necessarily infinitely distributive, and to 
recognize this distributivity as equivalent to continuity. 4 

Von Neumann also developed much of the theory of valuations in 
lattices. One can describe dimension, measure and probability func 
tions as all "positive valuations" on appropriate lattices. Von Neu 
mann s background in measure theory ([14; 28], etc.) made it easy 
for him to analyze the properties of such valuations. Thus, he showed 
that the "irreducible" factors of a complemented modular lattice 
correspond to its different linearly independent valuations. Again, 
he shared in developing the basic general theory of metric lattices, 
including the relation between metric convergence and star-conver 
gence. Unfortunately, his speculations on the role of d[x] in quantum 
mechanics, as an "a priori thermodynamic weight of states" [65, 
p. 833], never crystallized into a simple formal theory. 6 

Von Neumann s brilliance was not confined to mathematics. He 
coined the humorous name "pointless geometries" for continuous- 
dimensional projective geometries. He did not publicize the name, 
leaving to others the pleasure of rediscovering the pun. He also chose 
a sequence of appropriate words to describe the computing machine 
he developed at the Institute for Advanced Study, whose initials 
spelled MANIAC. His friends dissuaded him from adopting the name 
officially; it is now privately called the JOHNIAC. 

5. Other contributions. Though von Neumann s interest in lattice 
theory centered around possible applications to operator theory (and 
hence to the then new quantum mechanics), his scientific curiosity 
was also aroused by various other aspects of the subject. The satisfac 
tion of this curiosity led to further results. 

In fact, the lattice of closed subspaces of Hilbert space "reducing" 
(left invariant by) an operator does not necessarily satisfy the modu 
lar law, 

a C\ (b U c) = (a C\ b) U c iia^c. 



4 This result has recently been extended to orthocomplemented modular lattices 
by I. Kaplansky, Ann. of Math. vol. 61 (1955) pp. 524-541. 

* His Fourth Colloquium Lecture (1937) was on Transition probabilities and quan 
tum logics, but unpublished. The Institute for Advanced Study issued 17 pp. of 
mimeographed notes on Quantum logics in 1937. 



54 GARRETT BIRKHOFF 

However, the subspaces reducing a self-adjoint operator form an 
ortho-complemented lattice i.e., one with an intrinsic complementa 
tion satisfying 

(a Y = a, (a U b) f = a C\ b , (a Pi b) f = a \J b , 
which is also weakly modular in the sense that 

a Pi (a \J c) = (a H a ) W c if a c. 

These facts were well-known to von Neumann. 

Since all these laws are satisfied in the finite-dimensional case, the 
principle of the persistence of formal laws suggests that the formal 
logic of quantum mechanics should conform to the algebraic laws of 
an orthocomplemented modular lattice. (The assumption (a ) = a is 
equivalent to the "tertium non datus" principle excluded in Brouwer- 
ian logic.) This idea was developed in a joint paper [65], where it was 
shown (this result was entirely von Neumann s) that PG n (F) admits 
such an "orthocomplementation" if and only if F admits an involu- 
tory antiautomorphism. 6 

One aspect of the non-commutativity of the "quantum logic" is 
the failure of the distributive law. In general, one has only the semi- 
distributive laws 

a(^(b\Jc) (ar\b)^J(aC\c) and a U (b H c) ^ (aV b) H (a U c) 

which hold in an arbitrary lattice. Von Neumann quickly recognized 
these as special cases of the Minimax Inequality 

m n n m 

A V an ^ V A a if . 

t=i 3=1 y=i f=i 

He also recognized that a central feature of the theory of games is 
provided by the fact 7 that this inequality is replaced by equality 

Min Max/(p, q) = Max Min/(p, q) 
P q Q P 

= - [Min Max/(p, q)], 

&lt;? P 

for bilinear forms 

f(p, g) = p&i&i, 

p and q being variable probability vectors. 

It is most remarkable that the preceding results were all obtained 

8 A similar result has been established for continuous geometries by F. Maeda, 
Journal of Science of the Hiroshima University vol. 14 (1950) pp. 93-96. 
7 This is due to E. Borel, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris (1927) pp. 52-55. 



VON NEUMANN AND LATTICE THEORY 55 

in the four-year period 1934-1937, and mostly during two years of 
intense activity. Though his interest in lattice theory continued, and 
expressed itself in technical letters to other mathematicians, the 
subject was peripheral rather than central in his thoughts. (His 
paper [76] with Halperin was actually written and presented in 
1936.) 

In 1940, he returned briefly to the subject, in preparing lectures for 
a seminar at the Institute for Advanced Study which we conducted 
jointly. Here, he developed the theory of cr-complete lattice-ordered 
rings with strong unit. He never wrote up this work for publication; 
it was closely related to work of M. H. Stone (Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. vol. 26 (1940) pp. 280-283) done about the same time. Von 
Neumann s results were more general, because he did not assume the 
possibility of multiplication by real scalars. 

Another characteristic late contribution is his part in the so-called 
Caratheodory-Halmos-von Neumann theorem [83], which displays 
the algebra of measurable subsets on [0, 1 ] modulo sets of measure 
zero as a universal separable Boolean algebra with positive valua 
tion. However, a closer study of this highly technical paper reveals 
this as a very incidental result indeed. The main concern is with a 
much more difficult question: which Boolean algebras correspond to 
measurable sets under point-isomorphisms? 

By this time, von Neumann was primarily preoccupied with war 
time problems, and had developed an interest in computing and com 
puting machines. Though his book with Morgenstern on the theory 
of games reflects continued interest in lattices [90, esp. pp. 62-66], 
he never really worked on them seriously after 1942. 

6. Extensions of his work. It is usually difficult to sharpen von 
Neumann s results. With small concern for expository simplifications 
or intuitive motivations, he characteristically went straight to the 
heart of problems, and had an uncanny ability to check all the essen 
tially different possibilities, individually and in combination. This 
ability gives most of his work an objective finality, and makes later 
workers begin by trying to simplify von Neumann s arguments, or 
to apply similar techniques to related problems. 

Nevertheless, since von Neumann s initial lightning attack, there 
has been significant progress on some of the problems described 
above. Thus, the theory of continuous geometries has been clarified 
and extended over the past twenty years, especially by Halperin, 
Maeda, Gorn, and Iwamura. (Since this work has been conveniently 
indexed in Mathematical Reviews under the heading "continuous 
geometries," it is unnecessary to refer to individual papers.) In this 
connection, one should also mention Loomis recent analysis of di- 



56 GARRETT BIRKHOFF 

mension functions in weakly modular, orthocom piemen ted lattices 8 
an analysis which simplifies part of the discussion of [62]. 

Far less has been done to advance the theory of regular rings; this 
may be due to the formidable technical difficulties of the theory. It 
has been proved that a ring is regular if and only if IC\J = IJ for a 
right-ideal I and left-ideal /; also, if and only if it has (homological) 
weak dimension zero. 9 Various other more special results have also 
been proved 10 e.g., Brown and McCoy have replaced von Neu 
mann s rather involved proof of the fact that the nXn matrix ring 
over any regular ring is regular, by a much simpler proof. Recently, 
much more work has been done on the related class of "Baer rings," 
or rings in which every annihilator is generated by an idempotent. 

Again, the theory of metric lattices has been advanced by Smiley 
and Wilcox, Maeda, and Ky Fan. 11 Some questions about valuation 
in Boolean algebras, touched on by von Neumann in his work on 
dimension functions, have been resolved by Halmos and Maharam. 
As this work belongs mainly to measure theory, it will not be dis 
cussed here. Also, von Neumann s unpublished idea on lattice- 
ordered groups have been partially extended by R. S. Pierce and 
myself to rings. 12 

Von Neumann s (and my) ideas about the logic of quantum me 
chanics have been carefully analyzed philosophically by Mme. 
Destouches-Favrier in two books. 13 She has compared our views with 
those of de Broglie, J. Destouches, Reichenbach, and others. How 
ever, I know of no application of lattice-theoretic formulas to specific 
physical problems. 

One wonders what would have been the effect on lattice theory, if 
von Neumann s intense two-year preoccupation with lattice theory 
had continued for twenty years! 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



8 Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society, no. 10, 1955. 

9 For these results, see M. Harada, Journal of the Institute of Polytechnics. Osaka 
City University vol. 7 (1956); M. Auslander, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 8 (1957) 
pp. 658-664. 

10 For these results, see N. H. McCoy and Brown, Duke Math. J. vol. 13 (1946) 
pp. 9-20; F. Maeda, Journal of Science of Hiroshima University vol. 8 (1939) pp. 145- 
167 and vol. 9 (1939) pp. 73-84. I am indebted to Irving Kaplansky for these refer 
ences. 

11 References are given on p. 80 of the author s Lattice theory, Amer. Math. Soc. 
Colloquium Publications, no. 25, rev. ed., 1948. 

12 Anais Acad. Bras. Ciencias vol. 28 (1956) especially p. 67. 

13 La structure des theories physiques, and Determinisme et indeterminisme, Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1951, 1955. 



THEORY OF OPERATORS 
PART I. SINGLE OPERATORS 

F. J. MURRAY 

The work of von Neumann on Operator Theory as distinct from 
the later work on Rings of operators, extends from 1928 to 1932 with 
certain later additions. It is a remarkable development in which the 
inadequacy of formula mathematics for quantum mechanics was 
established and a new abstract approach introduced. This approach 
required the abstract definition of Hilbert space and reformulation 
of the basic Hilbert theory for bounded symmetric operators. Not 
only was the spectral theory of Hilbert space extended to the un 
bounded case, for self adjoint operators, but a fascinating new range 
of phenomena was explored the symmetric transformations which 
are not self adjoint. In addition, the foundations for the theory of 
rings were laid and the canonical resolution which itself was critical in 
further developments was obtained. 

At first glance, the Gram-Schmidt process seems an easy way to 
replace the notion of an abstract operator by a much more elementary 
object, an infinite matrix. One simply takes a denumerable set dense 
in the domain of the operator and orthonormalizes it. The matrix 
then is obvious and in terms of the matrix we can simply write 
formulas instead of abstract relations. It certainly is surprising to 
learn that this matrix does not necessarily give the operator we 
started out with and yet this possibility must be faced as soon as one 
tries to specify the operator itself. The operator is determined by 
certain relations and closure under linearity and in the topological 
sense. The exact modern form of this relation is in the last paper of 
this series, i.e., the one on adjoint operators, but the effort to attain 
such a form is clear throughout. The best examples to indicate the 
discrepancies between the obvious formulas and the result of closure 
is given by a sequence of closed symmetric transformations, each 
an extension of the previous one and each with a dense domain. To 
obtain significant formulas, the abstract structure must be considered ; 
one cannot rely on blind manipulation. 

The concept of domain brings to light other critical weaknesses in 
the obvious formula approach. The quantum mechanics certainly 
posed the problem of forming the sum or the product of two opera- 
Received by the editors February 14, 1958. 




58 F. J. MURRAY 

tors. For arbitrary operators the sum of two operators or their prod 
uct may be trivial because the intersection of their domains is trivial 
or because the intersection of the range of one with the domain of the 
other is trivial. The paper on adjoint operations again establishes a 
significant exception. The product of a transformation with its adjoint 
always has a significant domain and this fortunately applied to the 
square of an observable in quantum mechanics. 

From the point of view of quantum mechanics, by far the greatest 
weakness of infinite matrices in the unbounded case, is the fact 
that their spectral theory simply does not have significance. If a 
symmetric operator is unbounded above and below it will have infinite 
matrices bounded one way or the other and this is not a matter of a 
strange example, but true in the case of every symmetric operator 
which is unbounded above and below. In the paper on infinite ma 
trices, von Neumann uses this fact to obtain successive choices of 
axes so that a given matrix eventually corresponds to one for an 
operator with a pure point spectrum with prescribed values and hence 
the ultimate equivalence of any two infinite matrices in nine steps. 
The operators have been altered of course but there is nothing in the 
choice of coordinates to indicate this. 

The extension of the spectral theory from the case of bounded oper 
ator to the unbounded case, required the development of an ap 
paratus capable of classifying a wide range of phenomena involving 
symmetric operators. The self adjoint operators, for which a spectral 
resolution exists, are a subclass of these. If A is symmetric, the rela 
tions { (^1 i)f, (A-\-i)f\ form the graph of an isometric transforma 
tion, V. This isometric transformation may be unitary, i.e., it may 
take the full Hilbert space into itself. For a unitary transformation 
one can develop the spectral theory. (The bounded self adjoint case is 
re-established by the use of operational calculus in a fascinating and 
interesting manner in order to obtain the spectral resolution for uni 
tary transformations.) The Cayley transform permits one to carry 
this resolution for unitary transformations over to the unbounded 
self adjoint transformations. 

But what if the Cayley transform is not unitary? A whole realm of 
new possibilities appear. First of all, there is the matter of extending 
the original transformation. If V maps a proper subspace of Hilbert 
space into a proper subspace, i.e., if both its range and domain are 
less than the full space then V can be extended to a more inclusive 
isometric relation V which in turn is the Cayley transform of a 
symmetric extension of the original symmetric transformation. The 
contraction process is beset by the possibility of inadequate domain, 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART 1. SINGLE OPERATORS 59 

but the possibilities for extending a symmetric operator are immedi 
ately clear from Cayley transform. 

But now it is clear that we may have cases in which either the 
range or domain of the Cayley transform can be the full space but 
not both. Here, symmetric extension is not possible and yet the given 
symmetric transformation is not self-adjoint. It is then termed maxi 
mal. 

The simplest possible example of a symmetric transformation 
which is not unitary is one for which there exists a complete ortho- 
normal set 0i, 2 , 03, such that F0 n = n+ i. If the domain of a 
given V is the full space but the range is not, V must be compounded 
out of a transformation unitary on subspace and transformations in 
subspaces each equivalent to the above example. Reversing range and 
domain, one obtains an analogous result and this in turn permits a 
complete analysis of the structure in the maximal, symmetric case. 

For the non-symmetric closed operator, the canonical resolution as 
a product of self-adjoint transformation and an isometric transforma 
tion indicates completely not only the nature of the range and domain 
but also the character of the relation between them. The "existence" 
question is settled here in general, i.e., given g when is there an / 
such that g = Af? The canonical resolution is also critical for later 
development of dimension theory in Rings of operators. But the 
canonical resolution offers us no hint as to the algebra of a non- 
symmetric operator, nor indeed to the whole range of phenomena 
associated with the Jordan normal form. 

The fundamental construct of the adjoint paper is the "graph." 
Given an operator A, the graph of the operator is the set in &gt;0 
consisting of the pairs {/, Af}. The resulting simplification of the 
theory is amazing. Notions of closure, domain properties, adjoint 
properties, all became straight forward geometrical concepts. The 
essential result, the adequacy of the domain of A* A, is the result of a 
simple projection in $0^&gt;. This is the culmination of the geometric 
point of view for the analysis of operators, which was initiated by the 
interpretation of characteristic vectors as the principal axes of ellipses. 

The paper on The characterization of the spectrum of an integral 
operator represents the tie-in of the von Neumann operator theory 
with the integral operator theory. An integral operator is character 
ized by the fact that zero is the only condensation point of the 
spectrum. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

J. von Neumann, Allgemeine Eigenwerttheorie Hermitescher Funktionaloperatoren. 
Math. Ann. vol. 102 (1929) pp. 49-131. 



60 F. J. MURRAY 

, Zur Theorie der unbeschrankten Matrizen, J. Reine Angew Math. vol. 161 

(1929) pp. 208-236. 

, fiber Funktionen von Funktionaloperatoren, Ann. of Math. vol. 32 (1931) 

pp. 191-226. 

, Uber adjungierte Funktionaloperatoren, Ann. of Math. vol. 33 (1932) pp. 
294-310. 

, Characterisierung des Spektuems eines Integraloperators, Actualites Sci- 
entifiques et Industrielles, no. 229, Hermann and Cie, Paris, 1935. 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY 



THEORY OF OPERATORS 
PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 

RICHARD V. KADISON 

In his earliest work with operators (reported on in Part I of this 
article), von Neumann recognized the need for a detailed study of 
families of operators. Many of the subtler properties of an operator 
are to be found only in the internal algebraic structure of the algebra 
of polynomials in the operator (and its closures relative to various 
operator topologies) or in the action of this algebra on the underlying 
Hilbert space. His interest in ergodic theory, group representations, 
and quantum mechanics contributed significantly to von Neumann s 
realization that a theory of operator algebras was the next important 
stage in the development of this area of mathematics. The dictates 
of the subject itself had called for this development. 

In [20], von Neumann initiated the study of the so-called "rings 
of operators" also called "H / *-algebras" and, most recently, "von 
Neumann algebras" (by Dixmier [l]). The latter term seems par 
ticularly apt, and we shall refer to them in that way. 

Let us set down some notation and definitions. 

DEFINITION. A family of (bounded) operators S is said to be self- 
adjoint when A in $ implies A* is in F, A* the adjoint operator to A. 
The commutant , & , of $ is the set of those operators which commute 
with each operator in 3. 

We denote by "(#, y)" the inner product of the two vectors x, y in 
the Hilbert space 5C and by "||x||" the "length", (x, x) 112 , or "norm" 
of the vector x. If A is an operator on 5C, the continuity of A is 
equivalent to its boundedness; 



and \\A\\ is called "the bound" or "norm" of A. With d(A, B) =\\A-B\\, 
d is a metric on the bounded operators, and the topology induced is 
called the "uniform" (also "norm" and "bound") topology. The weak 
operator topology is the topology on the bounded operators with the 
fewest open sets for which the mappings A*(Ax, y) of bounded 
operators into complex numbers is continuous, for each pair of vectors 
x, y in 3C. The strong operator topology is the topology on the 
bounded operators with the fewest open sets for which the mapping 

Received by the editors December 13, 1957. 




62 R. V. KADISON 

A&gt;Ax is continuous, for each vector x in 3C (employing the metric 
topology on 5C). When no confusion can arise, we shall use the same 
symbol to denote an orthogonal projection operator and its range. 

DEFINITION. A "von Neumann algebra" is a self-adjoint algebra of 
operators which is closed in the weak operator topology. A "factor" is a 
von Neumann algebra whose center consists of the scalar multiples of its 
unit element. 

The many different operator topologies defined are not devices for 
multiplying the number of theorems one can state. They each arise 
critically in important situations, often being tailored to implement 
a particular point in a proof. It was von Neumann who recognized 
this technique, developed it, and used it extensively (for example, 
cf. [25]). 

The key result of [20 ] is: 

THE DOUBLE COMMUTANT THEOREM. The strong closure, (R, of 
the algebra generated by a self -adjoint family of operators, 3, is the von 
Neumann algebra generated by 3, contains a unit element, E, its maxi 
mal projection, and, if E is the identity operator, I, then (R = (3 :/ ) / . 

The proof reduces to showing that if A is in ($ ) then A is a strong 
limit point of (R (when (R contains /), i.e., if a positive e and vectors 
xi, - - - , x n are given, we must find B in (R such that || (A B)xi\\ &lt;e, 
i = l, - - , n. The essence of von Neumann s proof is contained in 
the following argument. Let [flto] be the closed linear manifold 
generated by the vectors Tx, T in (R. Clearly, each operator T in $ 
leaves [(foc](=E ) setwise invariant, so that E TE = TE . Since T* 
lies in SF, E T*E = T*E , and, taking adjoints, E T = E TE = TE , 
so that E lies in SF . Thus, by assumption, A commutes with E , 
and A leaves [tftac] invariant. Since (R contains /, [fox] contains x 
and, hence, Ax; which gives the desired result for the single vector x 
in place of #1, , x n . To handle the case of n vectors, von Neumann 
imbeds (R and A as operators on the w-fold direct sum of 5C with itself 
by assigning to T the operator T Q defined by T Q (ji, , y n ) 
= (Tyi, , Ty n ), notes that appropriate hypotheses are inherited, 
and replaces x by (x it - , x n ). 

In point of fact, von Neumann incorporated this idea in a some 
what more elaborate construction which gave him, at the same time, 
the existence of a unit element (projection) in (R. The existence of the 
unit can be obtained in an independent fashion, however. Observe 
that the range projection of an operator A (the projection on the 
closure of the range of A) is the strong limit of a sequence of poly 
nomials in A , by spectral theory, and therefore lies in (R. The union 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 63 

of two projections is the range projection of their sum, whence the 
union of a finite family of projections in (R lies in (R. Finally, the 
union of an arbitrary family of projections in (R, in particular, the 
family of range projections of operators in (R, is the strong limit point 
of the unions of finite subfamilies, and so lies in (R. The union of the 
range projections is clearly a unit for (R and the maximal projection 
of (R. 

This theorem has important uses in the study of von Neumann 
algebras. It is the primary technique for determining when an opera 
tor, r, associated with a von Neumann algebra (R lies in (R. One 
simply checks that T commutes with (R , or just a generating subset 
of (R . Spectral theory tells us that the set of projections and the 
set of unitary operators in a von Neumann algebra are both generat 
ing sets. An illustration of this technique arises from the canonical 
(polar) decomposition of a closed, densely-defined operator, T (cf. 
Part I of this article). If VH is this (unique) decomposition of T 
(so that H= (r*T) 1/2 and V is the unique partially isometric operator 
with initial space the range projection of H and range the range 
projection of 7") and T lies in (R (so that T, V, and H are bounded) 
then V and H lie in (R. By the Double Commutant Theorem and our 
previous comments, we need show only that V and H commute with 
each unitary operator U in (R . However, since 

T = U *TU f = U *VU U *HU, 

we see that U *VU and U *HU provide another canonical decom 
position of T. Uniqueness of this decomposition gives the desired 
commutativity and the conclusion. 

In [2l], abelian von Neumann algebras on separable Hilbert 
spaces are dealt with. It is shown that the operators in such an 
algebra are (Baire) functions of one self-adjoint operator in the 
algebra. The proof is basically a measure-theoretic one and entails 
the constructions which show that, under general conditions, a 
separable, nonatomic measure space is isomorphic with the unit 
interval under Lebesgue measure. The von Neumann result leads 
very quickly to canonical forms for self-adjoint maximal abelian 
algebras on separable Hilbert space. Each such is unitarily equivalent 
to the algebra of multiplications by essentially bounded measurable 
functions on L 2 of the measure space consisting of the unit interval 
with Lebesgue measure and a finite or countable number of points 
(equal to the number of minimal projections in the algebra), #1, 
x z , where x n has measure l/2 n . More specifically, if ft is the al 
gebra, E the union of its minimal projections, and there are n such 



64 R. V. KADISON 

projections (where n is possibly fc$ ), then & is the direct sum of GE, 
the algebra of all diagonal matrices on the w-dimensional Hilbert 
space E(3C) relative to an orthonormal basis for E(3C) obtained by 
choosing a unit vector in the range of each minimal projection, and 
Gi(I E) which is unitarily equivalent to the algebra of operators, 
Lf, denned on L 2 (0, 1) (with Lebesgue measure) by L f (g) =fg, pro 
vided I-E^O. 

Recognizing the need for a further and more detailed study of the 
weakly-closed, self-adjoint operator algebras before much progress 
could be made in the rapidly developing theory of group representa 
tions of infinite groups (locally compact groups, in general, and Lie 
groups, in particular), von Neumann undertook this project with 
F. J. Murray in 1935. This research was to lead to the important 
papers constituting the "Rings of Operators" series [17; 18; 19; 22]. 
The hope that this study might provide an adequate framework for 
the mathematical formalization of quantum mechanics was an added 
incentive. The resolution of this hope lies in the future, but a strong 
case can be made for the cogency of these methods in that formaliza 
tion. Moreover, the study has reflected back on physics through its 
use in the theory of representations of groups by unitary operators on 
a Hilbert space. 

Murray and von Neumann saw at once that the factors were the 
basic constituents in the theory of von Neumann algebras and pro 
ceeded directly to the analysis of this special class in the first paper 
[17] of the series. The prime example of a factor is the algebra of 
all bounded operators on a Hilbert space. It must be noted that all 
evidence from classical mathematical phenomena indicates that, 
algebraically speaking, these are the only factors the factor defini 
tion applied to finite-dimensional algebras yields algebras isomorphic 
to nXn complex matrices. Indeed, in any case, if the factor has a 
minimal projection (minimal idempotent) it is algebraically iso 
morphic to the algebra of all bounded operators on some Hilbert 
space. One might suspect that it is automatically the case that 
minimal projections exist (as indicated by the classical situation). 
This turns out not to be so, but the construction of factors for which 
it is false is no simple matter. Less powerful mathematicians, might 
have added the assumption that minimal projections exist, at an 
early stage of the study, thereby characterizing the algebra of 
bounded operators and bypassing the theory which is the vital force 
in abstract operator theory. 

Murray and von Neumann took a different path. Rather than 
search for projections of a particular size in the factor (viz., the 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 65 

minimal projections) they developed a general theory of the relative 
sizes of projections in a factor the so-called "comparison theory 
for projections." The basic idea was to consider two projections E 
and F as having the same size when a partially isometric operator 
V in the factor (R has F for its final space and E for initial space 
algebraically, V*V = E, VV* = F (this defines a partial isometry, V) 
geometrically, V maps the range of E isometrically onto that of F 
and is on I E. Two such projections are said to be "equivalent" 
(written: E~F), and, of course, E(=V*V) and F(=VV*) must lie 
in (R, if they are equivalent relative to (R. Making use of equivalence 
with subprojections in the natural way, Murray and von Neumann 
introduced a partial ordering, &lt; and &lt;., on the projections, with the 
usual notational usage. It is trivial to show that equivalence is pre 
served on orthogonal sums of projections, from which a Cantor- 
Bernstein result is straightforward. All of this was defined, and rele 
vant for von Neumann algebras (as distinguished from the special 
case of factors). The crucial fact, valid for factors alone, states that 
this partial ordering is total in a factor each pair of projections is 
comparable relative to comparison by partial isometries in the factor. 
In fact, for any von Neumann algebra, the polar decomposition of an 
operator in it provides us with a partial isometry in the algebra (as 
we noted earlier) which has about the same mobility properties on 
vectors (in getting them from space to space) as the original operator 
does. Now, in a factor, a proper subspace which is not moved into 
contact with all other subspaces by the operators of the factor, and 
hence its partial isometries, provides us with a proper invariant 
subspace, the projection on which lies in the center of the factor. 
Thus, in a factor, each pair of nonzero subspaces has a pair of 
equivalent proper subspaces. A measure theoretic exhaustion argu 
ment completes the proof of comparability in factors. Briefly, the 
high noncommutativity in factors provides high mobility of sub- 
spaces and this yields comparability of projections. 

Infiniteness (and finiteness) of projections is defined by equivalence 
with proper subprojections in the usual way; and the standard facts 
are readily proved with one notable exception. The finiteness of 
the union of two finite projections (even in the case where they are 
orthogonal) required a delicate and involved proof, which Murray 
and von Neumann supplied with characteristic power and ingenuity. 
This finiteness entails an analysis of the subspaces of the union, and 
such subspaces may be quite unrelated to the original spaces (having 
intersection (0) with both, for example). Much of the comparison 
theory can be developed by analogy with the theory of sets and 



66 R. V. KADISON 

cardinals, to which it is closely related. The analogy is not perfect, 
however, as in the situation just described (a subset of a union of 
sets being the union of its intersection with each of the sets) ; and 
this imperfection generates the major difficulties of the subject. 

Prolonged scrutiny of the difficult points in the theory developed 
by Murray and von Neumann, carried out under the greatly reas 
suring circumstances of the validity of the result in question being 
known, has led to several simplifications of proofs. The finiteness 
result is a case in point. In [14], Kaplansky effects the proof in the 
following steps. Each infinite projection E is the sum of two projec 
tions equivalent to E. (It is trivial that equivalence preserves finite- 
ness.) The essence of the problem is the analysis of a subprojection 
of a sum of orthogonal projections in terms of the summands, and it 
is shown that, with G^E + F, either G&lt;E or E + F-G^F. Thus, 
with E and F finite, if E-\-F is infinite and G is chosen as a subprojec 
tion of E-\-F equivalent to E-\-F and E + FG, G&lt;E contradicts 
the finiteness of E and E + F-G^F that of F. It follows that E + F 
is finite. The union of finite projections is easily reduced to the 
orthogonal case. The polar decomposition applied to E(I F) yields 
the equivalence of (EV/0 F and E- (E/\F) (where "V" and "A" 
denote union and intersection for projections). This result applied to 
G and F leads to G&lt;E, when Gf\F&lt; (E + F-G) AE, and applied to 
E + F-G, E leads to E + F-G&lt;,F, when (E + F-G) /\E&lt;G/\F, 
where G^E + F, with E and F orthogonal. 

Having established these results in comparison theory, Murray and 
von Neumann introduce their dimension function on projections in 
the factor (R. This is a function D mapping projections into the non- 
negative reals and oo such that D(E) &gt;0, if Ep^O; D(E)=D(F), iff 
E~F\ and D(E + F) =D(E)+D(F), if EF = 0. These properties 
determine D up to a positive multiple; and D has the further proper 
ties, &gt;(0) = 0; D(E) | D(F) if and only if E ~ F\ &gt;( E) 

= ^ a D(E a ), if {E} is an orthogonal family; and D(E)+D(F) 
= D(E\/F)+D(E/\F), this last follows from the equivalence of 
(E\/F) F and E (E/\F). To define D, choose any nonzero projec 
tion E in (R, and let D(E) = 1. A projection, F, is "rational" if F and 
E are the sum of m and n projections, respectively, in (R, each equiv 
alent to a projection, G; and let D(F)=m/n. For an arbitrary 
projection, G in (R, let D(G) be the supremum of the dimensions of 
rational projections contained in G. It is not difficult to show that D, 
as defined, is single- valued, with the properties noted. 

The essential uniqueness of D provides the algebraic invariant by 
which a gross separation of the class of factors into distinct algebraic 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 67 

types can be effected. The nature of the range of D is the vital indi 
cator. Normalizing D so that it is 1 on /, the identity operator, when 
/ is finite the possibilities for the range of D, on particular factors 
are: {l, ,},# = !, , in this case, the factor is alge 
braically isomorphic to all bounded operators on w-dimensional Hilbert 
space and is said to be "of type I n "; 

[0, l], the closed interval in this case, there are no minimal pro 
jections, and / is finite the factor is said to be "of type Hi"; 

[0, oo ] as above, with I infinite the factor is said to be "of type 
1 1."; 

{0, oo } each nonzero projection is infinite the factor is said to 
be "of type III." 

As we remarked, the existence of factors of types II and III was 
not at all apparent. Murray and von Neumann constructed a class of 
examples of factors of types Hi and !! with the aid of ergodic theory. 
It should be recalled that abstract measure theory and ergodic theory 
were in their infancy at the time of these investigations, and that 
matters which we handle with ease and assurance today required 
careful verification at that time. 

Let (5, S, m) be a measure space, with S the measurable sets and 
m the measure; and let G be a group of measure preserving trans 
formations of S, which acts freely and ergodically (i.e., m({ s: g(s) 
= s}) = 0, for each g in G different from e; and if So in S is such that 
m[g(So) S ] = 0, for each g in G then m(S ) is or 1). Each g in G 
induces a unitary transformation U a of L 2 (5, m) defined by (U (a))(s) 
= a(gM); and each essentially bounded measurable function, b, on 
S induces a multiplication operator, L b , defined by L&(a) = ba (the 
collection of such Lb is a maximal abelian algebra). Let JC be the 
direct sum of as many copies of L 2 (S, m) as there are elements in G 
(we must deal with G countable and Lz(S, m) separable if we wish 
to remain in the separable case). The examples consist of infinite 
matrices, with rows and columns indexed by G, whose entries are 
operators on L 2 (5, m) the matrix operating in the usual way on 5C. 
Let Ug be the matrix whose only nonzero entry in the h column is 
U in row gh, and let L? be the matrix with zeros off the diagonal 
and Lb as each diagonal entry. The von Neumann algebra, (R, gen 
erated by the Ug and the Lj is a factor, as can be shown by a computa 
tion employing the ergodicity and freeness of the action of G upon 5. 
Each operator in (R has all its diagonal entries equal to Lb, for some 
b depending on the operator. With E a projection, the associated b is 
real and non-negative almost everywhere on 5, so that fb dm is defined 
(possibly co). The mapping from E to fb dm is readily seen to have 



68 R. V. KADISON 

the properties of a dimension function on (R and, so, is the dimension 
function (up to a positive scalar multiple). Considerations of the 
range of this function lead immediately to the conclusion that if S 
has an atom, it is totally atomic, and (R is of type I finite if m(S) 
is finite, infinite otherwise; if 5 has no atoms, (R is of type II, finite or 
infinite as before. This example may also be viewed as the algebra of 
functions from the group to Li(S, m) which have square summable 
norms over the group and which by convolution action on the Hilbert 
space of all such functions, the convolution involving the group action 
on S, as with U g , yield a bounded operator. 

In [22], the third paper of the series, von Neumann produces 
examples of factors of type III, by considering groups of transforma 
tions which preserve measurability and sets of measure but admit 
only the trivial invariant measure. The construction is just as above 
with the exception that U g is defined by (U g a)(s) =f l g /2 (s)a(g(s)), 
where f a is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of the translated measure 
m g (defined by m g (S ) =m[g(So)]) with respect to m. The essence of 
the construction lies in the fact that a finite nonzero projection in the 
resulting factor would yield, together with the dimension function, a 
nontrivial invariant measure. Concrete examples of a Hi, 11^, and 
III are obtained by taking for G the group generated by rotation of 
the circle through an irrational angle and for S the circle under 
Lebesgue measure, in the first case; for G all rational translations of 
the real line and for S the real line under Lebesgue measure, in the 
second case; for G the group of transformations # &gt;a#-f/3, with a 
and /3 rational, a?^0, of the real line and for 5 the real line under 
Lebesgue measure, in the third case. 

In the examples of factors of type Hi just constructed the mapping 
T: A*fb dm, is defined, for all operators in (R not just projections 
since m(S) is finite and b is essentially bounded, and has the prop 
erties: 7X4)&gt;0, if A&gt;0 (recall that A^O means (Ax, *)^0, for 
each *); T(AB) = T(BA)\ T is linear, T(I} = \. In an arbitrary fac 
tor of type Hi, a function such as T, defined just on the self-adjoint 
operators, with T(AA*) = T(A*A) replacing T(AB) = T(BA) and 
linearity assumed for commuting self-adjoint operators alone, is 
unique. Indeed, the restriction of T to the projections of (R is the 
normalized dimension function, from which, linearity of T on com 
muting self-adjoint operators and an easily proved continuity yield 
T(A)=fydD(E y ), where \E y } is the spectral resolution of the self- 
adjoint operator A in (R. This provides us with a definition of T in 
the general case and the resulting function has the restricted proper 
ties T(AA*) = T(A*A) and linearity on commuting self-adjoint oper- 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 69 

ators in (R (as well as T(A) &gt;0 if A &gt;0 and T(I} = 1). This function, 

in the case of finite factors of type I, is the familiar trace function 

(normalized to be 1 at I). Murray and von Neumann call T the trace, 

in [17], and observe, as above, that it has the properties T(AB) 

= T(BA) and unrestricted linearity in all the examples they con 

struct, when it is extended to all operators in (R by means of the 

unique decomposition of an arbitrary operator in (R as the sum of a 

self-adjoint and skew-adjoint operator in (R. The property T(AB) 

= T(BA) hinges on the unrestricted additivity of the extended trace, 

and most of the second paper of the series, [18], is devoted to a re 

markably clever and intricate proof of this fact. The great difficulty 

stems from the inability to relate the spectral resolution of A +B to 

that of A and of B, when A and B are self-adjoint operators which 

do not commute. Although several other natural methods for intro 

ducing a trace present themselves, this proof withstood essential 

simplification until recently. In [l; 9], the basic "approximate local 

additivity" argument of Murray and von Neumann is employed in 

such a way as to give a simplified proof. The problem is easily reduced 

to that of finding a linear functional, /, on (R such that /( I) = 1 and 

f(A) ^0, when A ^0, (f is called "a state of (R") with the property 

f(AA*)=f(A*A). By symmetry, it suffices to find / such that 

f(AA*) ^f(A*A), for each A in (R, and, by compactness of the unit 

sphere in the dual to (R, to find / such that 

f n (AA*) ^ [(n + V/n]f n (A*A), 

for each positive integer n. If this can be accomplished for each 
A in E(RE, where E is a projection in (R of dimension l/m, then, 
decomposing / as a sum of m projections equivalent to E and trans 
forming the restriction of / to E(RE by means of the resulting 
partial isometrics, we obtain m functionals whose sum has the de 
sired property on (R. Writing g in place of f n and (R in place of E(RE, 
it suffices to find g so that 

D(F) g g(F) g (n + \)D(F)/n, 
for each projection F, since then, 

g(F) ^ (n + l)D(G)/n (n 



where G is equivalent to F, and the spectral theorem allows us to 
conclude this second inequality with a pair of positive self-adjoint 
operators in (R which are unitarily equivalent via a unitary operator 
in (R replacing F and G. In particular, the polar decomposition of A 
shows that AA* and A* A is such a pair, for A in the finite factor (R. 



70 R. V. KADISON 

Multiplying / by a positive scalar does not change its properties, so 
that we may drop the restriction on / and g that they be 1 at /. 
To find g satisfying the first inequality, Murray and von Neumann 
take the state co x of (R defined as o) x (A) = (Ax, x), for x a fixed vector 
of length 1, and prove by a clever but short exhaustion argument that 
a nonzero projection such as E can be found, with g taken as a posi 
tive scalar multiple of co x . States of (R such as w x are called "vector 
states" of (R. They are special cases of the "normal" (or "completely 
additive") states of (R those states co such that co(X) = 2 w () 
for each orthogonal family \E a } of projections in (R. The trace, T, 
is a normal state, and Murray and von Neumann show that, in the 
presence of a separating vector for (R (i.e., a vector, y, such that A 
in (R is if Ay = Q), T is a vector state. We know, more generally 
today, that, in the presence of a separating vector, each normal state 
of a von Neumann algebra is a vector state [2; 3; 7]. In any event, 
a normal state is a convex linear sum (possibly infinite) of vector 
states, and if the algebra is a finite factor, each normal state is a finite 
convex sum. 

The essence of the argument which establishes these results con 
cerning normal states of von Neumann algebras is the following. If 
a vector state majorizes another state it too is a vector state an easy 
consequence of the representation of bounded, conjugate-bilinear 
functionals on a Hilbert space as x, y &gt;(Ax, y). Using the vector state 
co x and the given normal state as in the approximate local additivity 
argument of Murray and von Neumann together with some refined 
polarization techniques completes the proof. 

In [18; |9 J, Murray and von Neumann devote considerable space 
to the reduction of the spatial or unitary classification problem to 
the algebraic problem. Specifically, in [18], they show that each iso 
morphism between finite factors can be implemented by a unitary 
transformation of the underlying Hilbert spaces provided that they 
have equal coupling constants. In more detail, if 61 is our von Neu 
mann algebra with commutant (R and x is a vector in 3C, the under 
lying Hilbert space, then [&lt;Rx], being invariant under the self-adjoint 
family (R, commutes with (R (i.e., its orthogonal projection does) and, 
so, lies in (R . Similarly, [(R #] lies in (R. If (R is a factor, we can form 
D([(${ x]) and Z} ([0te]), where D and D are the normalized dimen 
sion functions on (R and (R , respectively. The ratio, 

/&gt;([ *])/!&gt; ([*]), 

is independent of the nonzero vector x chosen and is finite in case 
(R and (R are finite it is called the coupling constant. Roughly 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 71 

speaking, the coupling constant compares the relative sizes of a 
factor and its commutant. The unitary implementation theorem 
above says that two isomorphic finite factors are unitarily equivalent 
if and only if they bear the same relative size to their commutants. 
In [l9], Murray and von Neumann carry these results over to a fac 
tor fa in all cases except fa of type III and the case of fa of type II M , 
fa f of type Hi. For factors of type III, Griffin [8] noted that, in 
the separable case, every isomorphism between factors of type III 
can be implemented by a unitary transformation making use of 
results of Dye [3]. The type II X , Hi case is settled by the result [lO] 
that such an isomorphism can be implemented by a unitary trans 
formation if and only if it carries a maximal cyclic projection (a 
maximal projection of the form [& (#)]) in one factor onto another 
such projection. (There exist isomorphisms which do not do this.) 
These later results make use of the new techniques of normal states, 
and, indeed, using these techniques, the whole spatial analysis of 
factors by Murray and von Neumann has been simplified and de 
veloped to handle the general von Neumann algebra [2; 4; 7, 8; 11; 
13; 27]. 

The basic fact used by Murray and von Neumann to prove the 
existence of the coupling constant, [l7, Lemma 9.3.3], applies to the 
general von Neumann algebra (as does their proof) and is a crucial 
step in the spatial analysis of these algebras. It states that for non 
zero vectors x and y, [fax]^ [fay] is equivalent to [(ft *] ~ [fa y] (the 

relations ~, &lt; , &gt; understood relative to the appropriate von Neu 
mann algebra, of course). It is easily seen that a subprojection of a 
cyclic projection is itself cyclic from which, it follows quickly that 
the proof of the stated result reduces to proving the case: [fax] 
~[&lt;Ry] implies [(R *J^ [&lt;R / y]. Suppose, for the moment, that we have 
the result. The mapping D([fa x]) &gt; ([(R.r]) is single-valued, then, 
for if D([fa x])=D([fa y]), we have [(R *]~[(R ;y], so that [fax] 
~[fay]; and D ([fax]) =D f ([(S{y]). In the same way the mapping is 
monotone increasing, and without difficulty, it can be shown to be 
additive, when all terms are defined. The existence of the coupling 
constant now follows. 

The proof which Murray and von Neumann supply for Lemma 
9.3.3 of [17] makes use of an auxiliary result [17, Lemma 9.2.1], 
which describes each vector in [fax] as the result of applying a 
closed densely-defined (unbounded) operator, T, which commutes 
with each operator in fa (we say T is "affiliated with CR") to x and 
then an operator in fa to Tx. This result requires a construction of 



72 R. V. KADISON 

Friedrichs [5] and, as might be expected, makes use of the theory of 
unbounded operators which von Neumann helped to found (cf. Part 
I). It is of considerable interest in itself but may be avoided and the 
proof of Lemma 9.3.3 simplified by making use of the technique of 
normal states. In fact, defining "the carrier of the normal state co of 
(R" to be the complement of the union of all projections (the maximal 
projection) in (R annihilated by co, we prove at once that if the 
carrier of co is contained in that of the vector state co* (which is easily 
seen to be [(R x]) then co is a vector state. An easy argument shows 
that if co has the same carrier as co z , and [(Rz] = 3C, then co=co x , with 
[(R#]=3C. (This need not be the case for each x such that co=co x , 
a careful choice must be made.) One then extends this result slightly 
to the case where co and co z are assumed only to have the same carrier 
and concludes the existence of x such that o}=co x with [(R#] = [(Rz]. 
For Lemma 9.3.3, assume that [(Si x] ~[${ y] and that V is a partial 
isometry in (R effecting the equivalence. Then 

[MVx] = F[(R *] = [(R y], 
and 

C (R* 



i.e., [&lt;RF#] = [to]. Replacing x by Vx, we may assume that [fo x] 
= [(R y]. In this case, by the extended carrier result just noted, 
coy = co z , for some z such that [(Rz] = [(R#]. The mapping, Az*Ay, 
A in (R, is isometric, since co y =co 2 , and extends to an isometric map 
ping of [(Rz](= [flte]) onto [&lt;3Vy]. This mapping, extended to 3C by 
defining it as on the complement of [(Rz], is a partially isometric 
operator V in (R , so that [&lt;R#]~[(R;y] in (R . 

The result which provides the fundamental building block for the 
spatial analysis of von Neumann algebras states that an isomorphism 
between von Neumann algebras (Ri and (R 2 for which there exist vec 
tors x and y, respectively, such that [&lt;Ri*] = 3Ci= [&lt;&ix] and [(&&] 
= 3C 2 = [flWy], where 3Ci and 3C 2 are the underlying Hilbert spaces 
for (Ri and (R2, respectively, can be implemented by a unitary trans 
formation of 3Ci onto 3C 2 . A vector such as x is said to be "a generating 
vector for (Ri." It is trivial to show that a generating vector for (R 
is a separating vector for (R r and conversely, so that x is both gener 
ating and separating for (Ri and (R/ . If 7 is the (adjoint-preserving) 
isomorphism, define the state co of (Ri by: co(^4) = (y(A)y t y), and note 
that co is a normal state with carrier /, since 7 is an isomorphism and 
y is separating for (R 2 . From our previous remarks, there is a vector z 
in 3Ci such that co=co z , [(Riz] =3Ci (and [(R/z] =OCi, since co has carrier 
7). The transformation, t/o, of the dense subset, (Riz, of OCi onto the 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 73 

dense subset, &lt;R 2 y, of OC 2 defined by: U Az = y(A)y J is single- valued 
(since z is separating), linear, and isometric, since 

\\Az\\* = (A*Az,z) = u(A*A) = (y(A*A)y,y) = \\y(A)y\\* = \\U Az\\*. 

Thus Uo has a unique isometric (unitary) extension, 7, mapping 3Ci 
onto 3C 2 . Now, 

Mtf- [7(3)y] = UAU-i(UBz) = U(ABz) = y(AB)y = y(A)[y(B)y], 

whence the two bounded operators, UAU~ l and y(A), agree on the 
dense subset, (R 2 ;y of 3C 2 ; so that U implements 7. 

In [l8], Murray and von Neumann establish, as their basic tool 
in the spatial analysis of factors, the unitary implementation result 
above for factors of type Hi with coupling constant 1. This is pre 
cisely the case of a separating and generating vector for the factor 
(and its commutant). In this case, the separating and generating 
vector may be chosen as a trace vector, i.e., a vector x such that co z 
is the trace on the factor (and its commutant). If such vectors are 
chosen for x and y, in the proof above, no adjustment of o&gt; need be 
made, for w = w x , since 7 preserves trace (from the characterizing 
properties of the trace). From this observation, Murray and von 
Neumann were able to establish their unitary implementation result 
and go on to the spatial analysis of factors without the benefit of the 
normal state results. They were limited, however, to situations which 
could be related to a trace, i.e., to factors not of type III. It is a 
curious circumstance that their approach to the spatial analysis of 
factors pointed the way to the spatial analysis of general von Neu 
mann algebras and, at the same time, diverted attention from the 
fundamental concepts by its reliance on the trace. 

It is appropriate to note, at this point, the result which relates 
factors of type II*, to those of type Hi. This relation is studied in 
detail in [l9J. If (R is a factor of type !! the identity projection, /, 
is infinite and the sum of a mutually-orthogonal, infinite family of 
equivalent finite projections, {&lt;*}, in (R. With E in {}, let Eo a 
be a partial isometry in (R with initial space E a and final space ; 
and let E a $ be E* a Eo , a partial isometry in (R with initial space Ep 
and final space E a . (The set {&lt;*/?} forms a family of matrix units for 
61.) The commutant of {E aff } in (R, {E a /j} A&, is a factor, (R , of 
type Hi, easily seen to be isomorphic to E a (RE a , for each a; and, 
without difficulty, it can be shown that (R is unitarily equivalent to 
(hence isomorphic with) the algebra of J^XK matrices over (R acting 
in the standard manner on the direct sum of E (3) with itself K 
times, which give bounded operators by such action, where N is the 



74 R. V. KADISON 

cardinality of {}. Another way of stating this result is to say 
that each factor of type !!&lt; is the Kronecker product of one of type 
Hi with one of type I x . 

We have remarked that the existence of factors of types other than 
I is a phenomenon not to be expected from classical evidence. The 
further separation of the class of factors into the algebraic types 
I n , Hi, IIoo, and III by means of a natural algebraic invariant, and 
the proof of the existence of factors of each type, raises the crucial 
question of whether or not this completes the algebraic classification 
are all factors of a given type isomorphic (separable case this is 
true for factors of type I). This question occupied much of the atten 
tion of Murray and von Neumann during the years of their research 
on operator algebras. They succeeded in answering this question in 
[l9J an answer which gave clear evidence of the complexity of the 
area they had penetrated. In [19], Murray and von Neumann pro 
duced two nonisomorphic factors of type Hi. This is done with the 
aid of a new class of examples of factors of type Hi (different from 
those obtained from the ergodic theory construction of [17], we have 
described). We emphasize that the construction is different though 
it may well be the case that factors arising from these different 
constructions are isomorphic. It is not known, to this day, whether 
or not all factors of type Hi arise from a given one of the construc 
tions (or from both). 

This class of examples is obtained as the group algebras of certain 
(discrete) infinite groups. Let G be a countably-infinite group with 
unit element, e, and let 3C be the Hilbert space of square-summable 
functions on G with the usual inner product (lo). For / and g in 3C, 
define: 



bEO cEG 

(the last equality obtained by taking b = c~ 1 a and noting that c *c~ l a 
is a 1-1 mapping of G onto G). With /and g in 1 2 , the sums, in ques 
tion, converge absolutely, by Schwarz s inequality. Let L f be the 
transformation defined on 3C by: L f (g)=f*g\ similarly, let R f be 
defined by: Rf(g) =g*f- With a in G, let a! be the function which is 1 
at a and elsewhere. It is trivial to verify that L a &gt; and R a &gt; are unitary 
operators on 3C. The easily proved result that, for T a bounded 
operator on 3C and / in 3C, if (Tb 1 , a ) = (/* b , a ), for each a and b 
in G, then L f = T, eliminates convergence difficulties and leads quickly 
to the following facts: 

(1) With Lf and L a bounded operators; 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 75 

aL f = L af , * = / where/*(a)=/(a- 1 ), L e , = I, if L f = L g then/=g. 

(2) The sets G and (R G of all L f and R f , respectively,/ in 3C, which 
are bounded operators on JC are self-adjoint algebras. 

(3) G=(RG and (&G=G, so that G and (Re are von Neumann 
algebras, and are generated by { L a &gt; } , { R a &gt; } , respectively. 

The von Neumann algebra G is a factor if and only if each con 
jugate class of G other than {e} is infinite. Indeed, if C is a finite 
conjugate class in G and / is the function which is 1 on C and else 
where on G then LfL a &gt;=L a &gt;Lf, so that L f lies in the center of Q, 
and (? is a factor if and only if L f = al, i.e., C= {e}. If each conju 
gate class other than {e} is infinite and L f lies in the center of G , 
then La -iL f L a =Lf, from which f(aca~ 1 } =f(c) , for each a and c in 
G. Thus, with G c the conjugate class of c, 

&lt; &gt;&gt; 

when c?^e, so that/(c) =0, for such c; and L f = al, i.e., &lt;&lt;? is a factor. 
Defining T(L f ) to be/(e) for Z,/ in &lt;?, we deduce at once that T is 
the normalized trace on G , which is, accordingly, a finite factor. Not 
being finite-dimensional, G is of type Hi. Specific examples of groups 
giving rise to factors of type Hi are obtained by considering G p , the 
group of permutations of the integers each leaving fixed all but a 
finite number of integers; and Gz the free group on two generators. 
The factors arising from these two groups are, in fact, ones which 
Murray and von Neumann show to be nonisomorphic. This is ac 
complished by the following argument. If (R is a factor of type Hi 
and T its normalized trace; A, B-^&gt;T(B*A) defines an inner product 
on (R relative to which (R becomes a pre- (incomplete) Hilbert space. 
We denote the norm of A in this inner product, T(A*A) 112 , by 
[[A]], and call the topology induced by the metric A, B-+[[A B]] 
"the metric topology on (R." (Relative to convergence in the metric 
topology, it is easy to show that, for each L f of the class of examples 
just described, L f = )60/(&lt;*).L i independently of the order of sum 
mation over G.) Murray and von Neumann now define a weak com- 
mutativity property for factors in terms of this metric as follows. 
The factor (R is said to have property F if, for each finite set of oper 
ators {AI, - - , A n } in (R and positive e, it is possible to find a 
unitary operator U in (R such that 

[[UA k - A k U]]&lt;t; k= 1, - . ,, 

and T(U)=Q (without this condition, one could always choose 7 
for U). If the group G gives rise to a factor G and has the additional 



76 R. V. KADISON 

property that, for any finite subset of G, some group element distinct 
from e can be found which commutes with each of them, then &lt;&lt;? 
has property F. This is the case for G p . Indeed, each Ak can be ap 
proximated metrically to within e/2 by a finite linear combination of 
Z, a s, and if c, different from e, commutes with each a (for all k; a 
finite subset of G) then T(L C &gt;) = 0; and L c &gt; is a unitary operator satis 
fying the inequality of property F. 

That (? a does not have property F is a somewhat more difficult 
matter though, the freeness of Gz might lead one to suspect this. 
Suppose, in fact, that G is a factor group containing a subset 6" and 
elements a\, a 2 , a z such that S\/aiSa,i l = G { e \ 5 S* a^Sa^ 1 , a^Sa^ 1 
are pairwise disjoint. We show that G does not have property F. 
Suppose that a unitary operator, U, in &lt;? is such that [[f/ ; 
-L a ;.U]]&lt;e, for .; = l f 2, 3, and Q = T(U)=f(e), where U = L f . Define 
m(So), for a subset S Q of G, to be ^ a es |/(a)| 2 &gt; whence m(G~ {e}) 
= 1, since 7 is a unitary operator of trace 0. Note that m is additive 
on G, i.e., with 6*2 and Si disjoint, m(Si\/Sz) =m(Si) +w(S 2 ); so that 



r 1 ) ^ m(G -)=!. 
The inequality condition on C/ leads easily to 

| m(S ) - m(a j S aJ- 1 ) \ ^ 2e, j = 1, 2, 3, 

for each subset So of G. Thus 

1 = m (G - {e}) = m(S V 
2m(S) + 2e, 



and from (*), 3w(5) 4e^l, so that 

1 - 2e 1 + 4e 



and l/14^e. Thus, for no e less than 1/14, is there a unitary oper 
ator satisfying the conditions of property F. It remains to note that 
G 2 has a subset such as 5 and elements such as ai, a 2 , a 3 . In fact, if 
G is the free product of two groups GI and G 2 with Gi of order not less 
than 2 and G 2 of order not less than 3 ; say a in GI is distinct from e 
and e, b, c in G 2 are all distinct, then those words of G which, in re 
duced form, begin with an element of G\ form a set such as 5 with 
ai, a 2 , a 3 taken as a, 6, c, respectively. In particular, the free groups 
on more than one generator give rise to factors of type Hi not having 
property F. 

In point of fact, Murray and von Neumann do not stop with ex- 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 77 

hibiting factors such as G P and &lt;(?,, but go on to study a general 
class of factors of type Hi of which Gp is a particular example. 
These are the factors (R of type Hi which are the weak closures of 
an ascending sequence (RiC(R 2 C of factors, (R n , of type I m . 
They call such factors "approximately finite" (poor terminology, 
since it seems to indicate that they are not finite factors), and Dix- 
mier [l] has since replaced this term with the more appropriate 
"hyperfinite" factors. It comes to the same thing to require that (R 
be the metric closure of the ascending sequence. In a long series of 
lemmas involving complicated order of choice arguments, metric 
approximations, and constructions of subfactors of types l m with 
special properties, Murray and von Neumann succeed in showing that 
all hyperfinite factors are isomorphic. Part of the process entails the 
establishing of several different criteria for hyperfiniteness of a factor 
at least one of which, different from the definition, deserves special 
mention because of its usefulness. If for each finite set of operators 
{Ai, , A n } in (R and positive e, one can find a finite-dimensional, 
self-adjoint subalgebra, (R , and operators, B\, , B n , in it such 
that [ [A k B k ] ] &lt; , k = 1 , , n, then (R is hyperfinite. It might be 
thought that a classification, or partial classification of factors of 
type Hi can be had, now, by considering factors of type Hi which are 
the weak closure of ascending sequences of hyperfinite factors, and 
so forth; but the criterion just noted implies, at once, that each of 
these is hyperfinite. 

The point to the detailed constructions in the proof of the iso 
morphism result for hyperfinite factors is to convert the ascending 
sequence of factors of type I m , guaranteed by the definition, into a 
sequence of factors of types 12, I-i, Is, . Once this has been ac 
complished, matching mappings between the subfactors of types I-m 
in two distinct hyperfinite factors can be found, without difficulty, 
and these give rise to an isomorphism between the hyperfinite fac 
tors. Beyond these results, the state of knowledge concerning the 
algebraic nature of factors is very much as Murray and von Neu 
mann left it. In [28], Pukanszky has exhibited two nonisomorphic 
factors of type III by means of an invariant analogous to property 
F. In both the Hi and III cases, a third isomorphism class remains 
to be discovered. 

We have not mentioned several topics touched on in the "Rings of 
Operators" series; normalcy and coupling in factors, the diagonal 
operation relative to maximal abelian subalgebras, matrix-like repre 
sentations, principal groups, *-anti-automorphisms. These topics 
have technical interest, primarily. Two others cannot be passed 



78 R. V. KADISON 

without further mention, however. In [22], von Neumann initiated, 
out of technical necessity for the construction of factors of type III, 
the subject currently called "noncommutative integration theory." 
In a factor of type Hi, the projections behave like the characteristic 
functions of measurable sets (with the exception that they do not 
commute under multiplication), the dimension function as a meas 
ure, and the trace as an integration process (on "integrable" opera 
tors). The situation, then, is noncommutative in its measure space 
aspect, rather than with regard to the range of its measure. This 
theme is fairly well-developed in more general circumstances than 
just that of a factor of type Hi by von Neumann who proves, among 
other things, a Riesz-Fischer result [22, Lemmas 1.4.11.4.3]. In 
[30], Segal carries this theory over to von Neumann algebras in 
general and also develops the proper general setting for the other 
topic we shall mention. 

Since its inception, the theory of unbounded operators on Hilbert 
space has held tempting promise for mathematicians who have had 
contact with it. Elementary formal manipulations of the most reas 
onable sort pay such high dividends as a solution to the Hilbert 
fifth problem and difficult results of a purely analytic nature. In 
deed, many of the computations of quantum theory are effected by 
these means. Unfortunately, most of these formal manipulations can 
not be justified, and it was von Neumann who pointed out, by exam 
ple, the pitfalls with which this subject is fraught (cf. Part I of this 
article). Nonetheless, when such formally appealing maneuvers lead 
readily to results so much sought after, one cannot help but long for 
a "world" in which these maneuvers are justified and von Neumann 
was, doubtless, no exception. With their discovery of factors of type 
Hi, Murray and von Neumann succeeded in creating just such a 
"world." We had occasion to mention unbounded operators affiliated 
with a von Neumann algebra. Denoting by [X] the closure of an 
operator X, if such closure exists (i.e., the smallest closed extension 
of X), in [17, Chapter XVI], Murray and von Neumann prove: that 
each linear, closed, densely-defined operator affiliated with a factor, 
(R, of type Hi has no proper closed extension affiliated with (R; that 
such operators, when Hermitian (formally self-adjoint) are self- 
adjoint; and that if ^((R) is the set of linear, closed, densely-defined 
operators affiliated with (R the mappings X, Y &gt;[X+Y], X, Y 
*[XY], and QJ, J\T &gt;[(rf] impose the structure of an algebra on 
^((R) closed under the *-operation and relative to which it is a 
*-algebra in the usual sense. 

The crux of the difficulty in formal manipulations with unbounded 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 79 

operators lies in the unrelatedness of the domain and range of one 
such operator with the domain of another. When we are assured that 
these sets have many vectors in common, much of the difficulty 
evaporates. The key to the reasonableness of ^((R), then, is contained 
in Lemma 16.2.3 of [l7] which guarantees just this. Specifically, 
Murray and von Neumann call a dense linear manifold, M, in 3C 
"essentially dense" when it is the ascending sum of a sequence of 
closed linear manifolds whose projections belong to (R; and they prove 
that the intersection of a sequence of essentially dense sets is essen 
tially dense. The finiteness of (R is crucial to this argument. It is 
then proved, in Lemma 16.2.3, that, for each linear, closed, densely- 
defined operator, X, affiliated with (R, the subset of the domain of X 
consisting of those vectors which map into a given essentially dense 
set is an essentially dense set. Since 3C is essentially dense, it follows 
that the domain of each such operator is essentially dense. In par 
ticular, the intersection of such domains is dense in 3C. To prove this 
key result, Murray and von Neumann employ the polar decomposi 
tion VH of X, with V a partial isometry in (R and H a positive semi- 
definite operator affiliated with (R. If M is the essentially dense set 
with Mi, If 2, an ascending sequence of subspaces associated 
with it, the inverse image, N k , of Mk under the bounded operator, 
VHE k , is a closed subspace whose projection lies in (R a trivial con 
sequence of the double commutant theorem where {E y } is the 
spectral resolution of H. Clearly, NiClNzCL - - , and the inverse 
image of M under X contains each N k . The facts that D(Mk)*l, 
since the union of the Mk is dense in 5C and they form an ascending 
sequence, and that D(N k )^D(Mk), since a bounded operator in (R 
maps N k onto Mk, are easy consequences of dimension theory; and 
the result follows. From the remark just made, by "weeding" our 
sequence, we can assume that D(Mj) &gt; 1 (l/2 ; +*), for any fixed 
positive k, where { M$] is a sequence associated with some essentially 
dense set M. If NI, N 2 , - is an infinite sequence of such sets with 
associated sequences M jk (for N k ) such that D(M ik ) &gt; 1 (1/2 +*), 
then, defining Mj to be A* Mjk, we have that AfiCJV/ 2 C , 
AfyCA* N k , and 



so that Vy Mj is dense in 3C. Thus, the intersection of an infinite 
sequence of essentially dense sets is essentially dense. 

Two papers, written by von Neumann, [23; 24] are closely related 
to, though not properly in, the "Rings of Operators" series. In [23], 



80 R. V. KADISON 

von Neumann considers infinite direct products of Hilbert spaces 
and of the algebras of bounded operators on them. Let A be an index 
set and 3C a Hilbert space corresponding to each a. in A. On the space 
5 of all elements (/) A, in the unrestricted product of the 3C a , for 
which nj|/|| converges, we consider the space S* of functionals 
linear in each coordinate. In S*, we define S* as the set of finite linear 
combinations of elements of 5* having the form H a g a , where (g a ) 
is in 5 and (II&lt;g&gt; a g a ) [(/)] =H a (/ a , g a ), for all (/) in 5. We define the 
function H a g a , H a h a -^Tl a (g a , h a ), extend it bilinearly, and note 
that it is an inner product on S* with which structure S* becomes 
a pre-Hilbert space. The set of all functionals &lt; in S* for which there 
exists a Cauchy convergent sequence (&lt;f&gt; n ) of elements in S* (relative 
to the given inner product) such that &lt; [(/)] =lim n n [(/)], for all 
(f a ) in 5, is a Hilbert space a concrete representation of the "ideal" 
completion of 6j. We denote this space by "II&lt;8&gt; a 3C a " and refer to 
it as "the full direct product of the spaces OC a ." Each operator, A, on 
3C ao gives rise to an operator A on the full direct product, 3C, deter 
mined by -4o(n tt /) = (n^ 8 /)4f at . The mapping, A &gt;A , is 
an isomorphism of the algebra, (B(3C ao ), of all bounded operators on 
3C ao into that, (B(3C), of 3C. At first glance, it might seem that the 
von Neumann algebra, (B generated by all the A (a varying) is 
(B(3C), as is the case for finite direct products (i.e., when A is finite). 
This is not so in general, and, in [23, Theorem IX], von Neumann 
determines the commutant of (Bo. It is reasonably clear that each 
operator U on 3C defined by U [(/)] = (a a fa), where \a a \ = 1, is a 
unitary operator which commutes with (B , and t/=(II a a a )/, pro 
vided II a a a converges. When Ii a a a does not converge, we have an 
interesting operator commuting with (B . Next, let us call an element 
(f a ) such that X^| ll/| ~~l| converges "a Co-element," and note that 
each Co-element lies in 5. (The Co-elements are those elements of 5 
which are well-behaved and nonzero up to elimination of a finite 
number of coordinate values and, so, the relevant elements for 
what follows.) For each Co-element, (/), consider the closed linear 
space, 3C(/), in 5C generated by those Co-elements which differ from 
the given one at no more than a finite number of coordinates. Then 
distinct 3C(/) are orthogonal and generate 5C. Each 3C(/ a ) is called a 
"partial direct product" ("incomplete direct product" and the full 
one "the complete direct product" by von Neumann). In the finite 
product case, there is one 3C(/ a ), viz., 3C, but, in the infinite case, 
there are more. Clearly, each 3C(/) is invariant under each A , so 
that the projection, (/), on this space commutes with (Bo. The 
U(a a ), defined above, and the E(f a ) generate the commutant of (Bo. 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 81 

Each operator in (B is determined on the space 3C generated by the 
images of 3C(/) under all U(a a ), of course, once it is specified on 
JC(/). Moreover, if we specify bounded operators on each such 3C 
consistent with this requirement, the resultant operator on 3C will 
lie in (Bo, provided simply that it is bounded (i.e., if and only if the 
set of bounds of the specified operators is bounded). Thus, the restric 
tion of (B to each 3C(/ a ) is the set of all bounded operators on 3C(/ a ), 
i.e., a factor of type !. The really interesting situation occurs when 
von Neumann considers a special subalgebra of (Bo arising from a par 
ticular construction. Let { 3C nm } be a family of 2-dimensional unitary 
spaces indexed by pairs of positive integers, m = l, 2, and (B nwi be its 
algebra of (bounded) operators. Form 3C = II &lt;S&gt; nm^Cnm and (Bo as 
above. If we denote by G the von Neumann subalgebra of (Bo gener 
ated by operators A n \ in (B n i (injected into (B ), = 1, 2, , then e 
is just the injection of the (B arising from II n 3C n i into (B[(n n 3Ci) 
&(II03Gi)] t and its restriction to a partial direct product is of type 
1^, as before. However, if we form 3C = n n (3C n i3Cn2), inject A n \ 
onto 3C n i3Cn2 and then onto 3C and denote by G the von Neumann 
algebra generated; the picture changes significantly. To begin with, 
elementary matrix theory shows that each element g n of 3Cni&lt;8&gt;3C n2 
can be put in the normal form 




relative to some bases x n i,i, x n i,z for 3C n i and x n z,i, x nZ ,2 for 3C n2 , where 
O^oin^l. Two elements (g n ), (gn ) of 3C lie in the same 3C(/ a ) if and 
only if 

-- [(1 + a n ) 1/2 (l + ) 1/2 + (1 - n) 1/2 (l - n ) 1/2 ] - 
^ 

converges. In the special case where l=ai = o&gt;2= , C restricted 
to the partial direct product, 3C(g n ) is of type !. When = ai = a 2 
= , von Neumann establishes that the restriction of Co to 3C(g n ) 
is a factor of type Hi. He accomplishes this by constructing an iso 
morphism with one of the type Hi examples of a group acting on a 
measure space (described earlier). More specifically, the space is the 
unrestricted direct sum of two element groups and the group is the 
restricted direct sum (a subgroup of the unrestricted sum) acting by 
translation on the full group. The measure on the space is taken as 
that induced by Lebesgue measure on the unit interval via the map 
ping which takes each point ^ m =i @ m /2 m , /3 m = 0, 1, in the unit inter- 



82 R. V. KADISON 

val onto the group element (/3 m ) of the space (this mapping is single- 
valued and one-one on the complement of the dyadic nationals, a 
set of Lebesgue measure zero). When ct n is 1 for n even and for n odd, 
in the construction with 2-dimensional unitary spaces, we are in the 
case of a product of a factor of type !, with one of type Hi, and one of 
type IIoo results. In any event the restriction of C to a partial direct 
product, in this construction, is a factor, and von Neumann conjec 
tures that none of these are of type III. (Recall that in October of 
1937, when [23] was submitted, factors of type III had not been 
constructed.) In [19] (cf., Introduction), von Neumann notes that 
his conjecture was incorrect in particular, when there exists a posi 
tive 6 such that 8^a n ^l 5, for infinitely many a n , the resulting 
factor is of type III. (A proof of this was never published, though it 
should not be hard to supply with the techniques of [22; 23].) 

The second paper, related to the "Rings of Operators" series which 
we shall discuss, [24], nearly came to the same end as the work on 
factors of type III mentioned in the introduction to [19]. In fact 
[24] is alluded to in the introduction to [23] but appears in 1949 (at 
the request of Mautner who needed its results for some of his work 
on group representations [16]). The substance of [24] is the descrip 
tion of a process by which a direct integral of Hilbert spaces and von 
Neumann algebras thereon, over a measure space, can be formed. If 
the measure space is totally atomic the direct integral reduces to a 
direct sum, and the general process bears the same relation to form 
ing the direct sum that general integration theory does to discrete 
summation. The inverse process is also a major concern of [24] i.e., 
the process of "reducing" a Hilbert space and von Neumann algebra 
thereon to a direct integral of Hilbert spaces and von Neumann 
algebras on each, relative to an abelian von Neumann algebra in the 
commutant of the original von Neumann algebra. One of the prin 
cipal results of the paper (and, perhaps, its primary motivation) is 
the theorem that each von Neumann algebra can be reduced, relative 
to its center, to a direct integral of factors (the Hilbert space con 
structs are unique up to sets of measure and the measure up to ab 
solute bicontinuity). This result gives some justification for the pre 
ponderance of attention paid by Murray and von Neumann to fac 
tors over the general von Neumann algebra and supplies a possible 
technique for analyzing von Neumann algebras in terms of factors. 
In point of fact, however, the experience of the past decade has shown 
us that, when specific reduction results are not in question, it is best 
to deal with von Neumann algebras by global techniques thereby 
avoiding intricate measure-theoretic difficulties. 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 83 

Let X be a locally compact space and m a positive measure on X. 
A mapping, x &gt;3C(x), associating with each point of X a Hilbert 
space is said to be "an w-measurable field of Hilbert spaces" when 
there exists a linear subspace L of the product T[xex3(x) (=-P) such 
that 

(a) for a in L, * ||a(#)|| is measurable; 

(b) if b^P and (b(x), a(x)) is measurable, for each a in L then b 
is in L; 

(c) there is a denumerable set { O } _!,*.... of elements of L such 
that the closed subspace generated by [a n (x) } is 3C(#), for each x in 
X. 

The set, 3C, of elements, a, in P for which 



f | 

J.T 



forms a Hilbert space relative to the inner product 

(a, b)= f a (x)l(x)dm(*), 
J x 

and this Hilbert space 3C is called "the direct integral (written: 
fx&lt;&3C(x)dm(x)) of the 5C(#) over X, relative to m." If the mapping, 
x &gt;T(x) (an operator on 3C(#)) is such that # *||7Xx)|| is measurable 
and essentially bounded, the operator T on 3C defined by (T(a))(x) 
= T(x)a(x) is bounded with bound equal to the essential supremum 
of x ||jT(x)||. Operators such as T on 3C are said to be "decomposa 
ble." These definitions and results provide the background for the 
direct integral and reduction theory described in the preceding para 
graph. 

A problem of some importance, for a complete understanding of 
the structure of von Neumann algebras, is that of characterizing them 
abstractly (independently of a concrete representation on a Hilbert 
space). In [26], von Neumann takes up this question. The appropri 
ate techniques for this problem were not at hand at that time, and, 
while some progress was made, a satisfactory solution was not ob 
tained. Gelfand and Neumark succeeded in finding an excellent char 
acterization of a broader class of self-adjoint operator algebras than 
the von Neumann algebras, the so-called C*-algebras (those closed 
in the uniform topology on operators) [6]. As currently revised, their 
result states: each Banach algebra with a conjugate-linear, anti- 
automorphic, involutory*-operation (like the adjoint operation for 
operators on a Hilbert space) for which ||a*a|| =||a*|| -||a|| is *-iso- 



84 R. V. KADISON 

morphic with a uniformly closed self-adjoint operator algebra. (The 
mapping is isometric on elements which commute with their own 
adjoint and regular elements and, very likely on all elements, 
though this is not known. With the additional assumption, ||a|| 
= ||a*||, the isomorphism can be shown to be isometric.) Following 
the results of [6], Rickart and Kaplansky [14; 15; 29] developed an 
"algebraic" theory of von Neumann algebras in a subclass of the C*- 
algebras which had the formal algebraic properties of the von Neu 
mann algebras (but which was known to be a properly larger class). 
Many of the global techniques, which make the current use of von 
Neumann algebras a powerful and effective tool, stem from these 
algebraic investigations. From the Gelfand-Neumark result, our 
algebraic characterization question becomes: when is a C*-algebra 
of operators on a Hilbert space *-isomorphic with a von Neumann 
algebra? The condition that each bounded set of self-adjoint oper 
ators in the algebra, directed by the natural ordering on such oper 
ators, has a least upper bound in the algebra is the crucial algebraic 
feature of von Neumann algebras as distinguished from the general 
C*-algebra. (Conditions related to this are used in [14; 29].) To an 
swer the characterization question, we assume this condition holds 
for our C*-algebra. Such an algebra is *-isomorphic with a von Neu 
mann algebra if and only if there exists a separating family of states 
whose limits on a directed, bounded family of self-adjoint operators 
is their value at the limit [12] (this is equivalent to the states being 
normal). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. J. Dixmier, Les algebres d operateurs dans Vespace Hilbertien, Paris, 1957. 

2. , Sur les anneaux d operateurs dans les espaces hilbertiens, C. R. Acad. 

Sci. Paris vol. 238 (1954) pp. 439-441. 

3. H. Dye, The Radon-Nikodym theorem for finite rings of operators, Trans. Amer. 
Math. Soc. vol. 72 (1952) pp. 243-280. 

4. - , The unitary structure in finite rings of operators, Duke Math. J. vol. 20 
(1953) pp. 55-70. 

5. K. Friedrichs, Spektraltheorie halbbeschrdnkter Operatoren, Math. Ann. vol. 109 
(1934) pp. 465-487. 

6. I. Gelfand and M. Neumark, On the imbedding of normed rings into the ring of 
operators in Hilbert space, Rec. Math. (Mat. Sbornik) N.S. vol. 12 (1943) pp. 197-213. 

7. E. Griffen, Some contributions to the theory of rings of operators, Trans. Amer. 
Math. Soc. vol. 75 (1953) pp. 471-504. 

8. - , Some contributions to the theory of rings of operators, II, Trans. Amer. 
Math. Soc. vol. 79 (1955) pp. 389-400. 

9. R. Kadison, On the additivity of the trace in finite factors, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. vol. 41 (1955) pp. 385-387. 



THEORY OF OPERATORS, PART II. OPERATOR ALGEBRAS 85 

10. , Isomorphisms of factors of infinite type, Canadian J. Math. vol. 7 

(1955) pp. 322-327. 

11. , Unitary invariants for representations of operator algebras, Ann. of 

Math. vol. 66 (1957) pp. 304-379. 

12. , Operator algebras with a faithful weakly-closed representation, Ann. of 

Math. vol. 64 (1956) pp. 175-181. 

13. I. Kaplansky, Quelques resultats sur les anneaux d operateurs, C. R. Acad. Sci. 
Paris vol. 231 (1950) pp. 485-486. 

14. - , Projections in Banach algebras, Ann. of Math. vol. 53 (1951) pp. 235- 
249. 

15. - , Algebras of type I, Ann. of Math. vol. 56 (1952) pp. 460-472. 

16. F. Mautner, Unitary representations of locally compact groups, Ann. of Math, 
vol. 51 (1950) pp. 1-25. 

17. F. Murray and J. von Neumann, On rings of operators, Ann. of Math. vol. 37 
(1936) pp. 116-229. 

18. , On rings of operators, II, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 41 (1937) pp. 

208-248. 

19. - , On rings of operators, IV, Ann. of Math. vol. 44 (1943) pp. 716-808. 

20. J. von Neumann, Zur Algebra der Funktionaloperatoren und Theorie der 
normalen Operatoren, Math. Ann. vol. 102 (1929) pp. 370-427. 

21. , Uber Funktionen von Funktionaloperatoren, Ann. of Math. vol. 32 

(1931) pp. 191-226. 

22. - , On rings of operators, III, Ann. of Math. vol. 41 (1940) pp. 94-161. 

23. , On infinite direct products, Compositio Math. vol. 6 (1938) pp. 1-77. 

24. , On rings of operators, Reduction theory, Ann. of Math. vol. 50 (1949) 

pp. 401-485. 

25. , On some algebraical properties of operator rings, Ann. of Math. vol. 44 

(1943) pp. 709-715. 

26. , On an algebraic generalization of the quantum mechanical formalism I, 

Rec. Mat. (Mat. Sbornik )N.S. vol. 1 (1936) pp. 415-484. 

27. R. Pallu de la Barriere, Sur les algebres d operateurs dans les espaces hilbertiens, 
Bull. Soc. Math. France vol. 82 (1954) pp. 1-51. 

28. L. Pukanszky, Some examples of factors, Publicationes Mathematicae vol. 4 

(1956) pp. 135-156. 

29. C. Rickart, Banach algebras with an adjoint operation, Ann. of Math. vol. 47 
(1946) pp. 528-549. 

30. I. Segal, A non-commutative extension of abstract integration, Ann. of Math. vol. 
57 (1953) pp. 401-457. 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY 



VON NEUMANN ON MEASURE AND ERGODIC THEORY 

PAUL R. HALMOS 

According to a currently popular principle of classification, mathe 
matics is the study of various "categories." A category consists of 
certain "objects" (e.g., groups, topological spaces) and certain 
"mappings" (e.g., homomorphisms, continuous functions). One pos 
sible category has measure spaces for its objects and, correspondingly, 
measure-preserving transformations for its mappings. The usual dis 
tinction between pure measure theory on the one hand and ergodic 
theory on the other hand is merely the distinction between the study 
of the objects and the study of the mappings of this particular cate 
gory. The purpose of the following pages is to give a descriptive sum 
mary of von Neumann s contributions to this category. 

Pure measure theory consists of two parts whose motivations, 
methods, and results are radically different in both spirit and detail ; 
one part treats finitely additive measures and the other part insists 
on assuming countable additivity. A corresponding split in ergodic 
theory is perfectly conceivable, but it just does not happen to exist; 
up to now ergodic theory has been built on a countably additive 
foundation only. Von Neumann s most spectacular contribution to 
this whole circle of ideas is in ergodic theory. This is not to say that 
he left no mark on pure measure theory; the discovery of the relation 
of the problem of (finitely additive) measure to group theory, and the 
proof of the uniqueness of (countably additive) Haar measure in 
locally compact groups are mathematical accomplishments of con 
siderable importance. There are also a couple of isolated measure- 
theoretic results, one pretty and startling new proof of an old theorem, 
and some lecture notes of expository value. Let us proceed to a 
slightly more technical discussion of these matters, in the following 
order: finitely additive measures, countably additive measures, and 
measure-preserving transformations. 

The "problem of measure" for w-dimensional Euclidean space R n 
may be stated as follows: does there exist a positive, normalized, in 
variant, and additive set-function on the class of all subsets of R n ? 
("Positive" means non-negative, "normalized" means that the meas 
ure of the unit cube is 1, "invariant" means invariant under rigid 
motions, and "additive" means finitely additive.) The work of 

Received by the editors October 28, 1957. 




VON NEUMANN ON MEASURE AND ERGODIC THEORY 87 

Hausdorff and Banach implies that the problem of measure has a 
positive solution if n = V or n = 2 and a negative solution in all other 
cases. This fact has caused some mathematicians to say that the 
character of space changes in a fundamental and slightly mysterious 
manner in the passage from two dimensions to three. The purpose of 
von Neumann s memoir [5] on the subject is to put the problem into 
a proper general context and, within that context, to analyze and to 
extend the known (positive and negative) results. The profound in 
sight to be gained from the paper is that the whole problem is es 
sentially group-theoretic in character, and that, in particular, for the 
solvability of the problem of measure the ordinary algebraic concept 
of solvability of a group is relevant. Thus, according to von Neumann, 
it is the change of group that makes a difference, not the change of 
space; replacing the group of rigid motions by other perfectly reason 
able groups we can produce unsolvable problems in R 2 and solvable 
ones in R*. 

The right way to generalize the problem of measure is to replace 
R n by an arbitrary set X, to replace the unit cube (mentioned in the 
normalization) by an arbitrary subset C of X, and to replace the 
group of rigid motions by an arbitrary group G of transformations 
acting on X\ let us call the generalization so obtained the (X, C, G) 
problem. A useful special case is the (G, G, G) problem, where G is 
an arbitrary group considered as acting on itself by, say, left multipli 
cation. If this special problem has a solution for a particular group G, 
then that group G is called "measurable." The general problem is 
reduced to the special problem in this sense: if G is a measurable 
group, then there is a relatively simple condition on X, C, and G that 
is necessary and sufficient for the solvability of the (X, C, G) problem. 
(\Ve do not need to state the condition here, but, for purposes of 
reference, let us call it the condition K.) An abelian group is always 
measurable; if TV is a normal subgroup of G such that both TV and 
G/N are measurable, then G is measurable. It follows that every 
solvable group is measurable. Since the condition K turns out to be 
satisfied in the classical cases (rigid motions on Euclidean spaces), 
and since the group of rigid motions on R n is solvable exactly when 
n = l or n = 2, the positive solution of the classical problem is sub 
sumed under the generalization. 

The classical negative results need different treatment; the crucial 
condition this time is the representability in G of a free group on two 
generators. The group of rigid motions on R n satisfies this condition 
exactly when n&gt;2, and the unimodular group on R* also satisfies it. 
One of the things we can conclude from all this has a curious sound. 



88 P. R. HALMOS 

The rigid motions on R 2 are the length-preserving maps and the 
unimodular transformations are the area-preserving maps, so that 
the length-preserving maps preserve some generalized area whereas 
the area-preserving maps do not. 

If the negative results are viewed as paradoxical, then there is even 
a paradox in R 1 , but it is of a metric (not measure-theoretic) charac 
ter. Briefly: if E and F are subsets of R 1 , write E &lt; F if each of E and 
F can be decomposed into the same finite number of pieces so that 
there is a one-to-one and distance-decreasing mapping from each 
piece of F onto the corresponding piece of E. Assertion : if E and F 
are arbitrary nondegenerate intervals, then E&lt;F. 

A related paradox is von Neumann s sharpening of the usual 
(Vitali) argument for proving the existence of a nonmeasurable set. 
(The existence of such a set, by the way, yields a conclusive negative 
answer to the problem of countably additive measure in R n for all 
values of n.) The usual construction constructs a countable partition 
of the perimeter of a circle (or of the entire line) into pairwise con 
gruent sets. Is there such a partition for a bounded interval? The 
question is of a technical, gymnastic kind, and von Neumann s posi 
tive answer [4] uses the set- theoretic and epsilontic trickery ap 
propriate to this domain. 

Some of the methods of these papers on pathological measure 
theory are of greater significance than the results. In anticipation of 
his later study of dimension theory in algebras of operators, von 
Neumann made use of Banach s results on equivalence by finite de 
composition, and, in anticipation of his later work on almost periodic 
functions, he had occasion to reformulate the problem of measure in 
terms of certain "means" of functions. 

There is a more or less measure-theoretic question that arises 
naturally at the beginning of the subject; this is perhaps the ap 
propriate time to mention von Neumann s treatment of it. Is there a 
way of selecting a collection of measurable sets in, say, the line, so 
that every measurable set is equivalent to exactly one selected set, 
and so that the process of selection preserves the finite set-theoretic 
operations? The answer [7] is yes, and the result is generalizable to 
the related selection problem for measurable functions. Later, in a 
joint work with Stone [15], the problem is placed into its appropriate 
algebraic setting. The general question is this: if A is a Boolean al 
gebra and M is an ideal in A, when does there exist a subalgebra of A 
such that the restriction to that subalgebra of the projection from A 
to A/M is an isomorphism? Various sufficient conditions are given; 



VON NEUMANN ON MEASURE AND ERGODIC THEORY 89 

they are concrete enough to be applicable to the original (set- 
theoretic) problem. 

\Ye turn now to von Neumann s work on analytic, nonpathological 
measure theory. The most original item here is the proof of the 
uniqueness of Haar measure. Compact groups are treated in [14]. 
The method (later used systematically in the study of almost periodic 
functions) involves the construction of invariant means of continuous 
functions; the key fact is the compactness of the convex closure of the 
set of all left translates of each continuous function. The extension of 
the result to locally compact groups [16] calls for completely different 
methods. The idea now is to replace a given left invariant measure m 
by a smoothed version m that has all the assumed properties of m, 
plus the new and highly desirable property of right zero-invariance. 
The smoothed measure is denned by m (E] =fw(x)m(Ex)dm(x), with 
an appropriate weight function w\ to say that it is right zero-invariant 
means that m (Ex) vanishes exactly when m (E) does. The possibility 
of passing from m to m is used to reduce the general uniqueness 
problem for left invariant measures to the special case of right zero- 
invariant measures. After the reduction, the technique is a moderately 
straightforward application of Fubini s theorem ; the secret of success 
is that the group, acting on itself by left multiplications, acts er- 
godically. 

In a footnote in his 1936 paper on Haar measure von Neumann 
indicated that he knew a new proof of the Radon-Nikodym differ 
entiation theorem, but he did not publish the details of that proof 
till four years later. The article [17] is devoted to the construction of 
algebras of operators with peculiar properties. When in the course 
of the construction von Neumann found that he needed some meas 
ure theory, he cheerfully waded in and started writing a quick text 
book on the subject. In six pages we get definitions of all the basic 
concepts (e.g., measure and measurable function) and a motivation, 
statement, and proof of the Radon-Nikodym theorem. Since the 
proof tidies up a corner of analysis in a completely satisfactory way, 
and since it deserves to be better known, we shall look at the situation 
in a little more detail. 

At the center of the stage there are three deservedly celebrated 
theorems: the Riesz-Fischer theorem (F) on the completeness of Z, 2 , 
the Radon-Nikodym theorem (TV) on the differentiability of ab 
solutely continuous set-functions, and the Riesz representation 
theorem (R) for bounded linear functionals on L 2 by means of inner 
products. None of these theorems by itself is trivial to prove; the 



90 P. R. HALMOS 

pleasant and perhaps surprising fact is that the passage from any one 
of them to the others is, comparatively speaking, child s play. Thus, 
in particular, (R) is a very easy consequence of (N) ; von Neumann s 
proof proceeds in the reverse direction and shows how to derive 
(N) from (R). 

The derivation (for finite positive measures) runs as follows. Sup 
pose that m is absolutely continuous with respect to m f , and write 
m" = m+m . If /(/) =ffdm, then I is a bounded linear functional on 
L z (m") and consequently, by (R), /(/) is represen table in the form 
Jfgdm". The Radon-Nikodym derivative of m with respect to m 
is /(!-). 

In his lectures at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1934 von 
Neumann discussed measure theory. The mimeographed notes of 
these lectures, despite their limited circulation, were for a long time 
one of the major sources of measure-theoretic information in the 
United States. (They became more widely available fifteen years 
later, when they were reproduced and republished in more permanent 
form [l9].) They contain an extremely thorough and detailed exposi 
tion of the classical theory of Lebesgue measure in Euclidean spaces, 
and they contain also the generalization of the theory to abstract 
measure spaces. Except for a few technical details (e.g., the concept 
of a semiring) the work is not original. It does, however, contain 
results that it is difficult to find anywhere else. It contains, for in 
stance, a study of the connection between set-functions and point- 
functions (i.e., the theory of "cumulative distribution functions") in 
R n , which is an important and complicated subject that most books 
avoid, or, at best, treat in the trivial one-dimensional case only. 

In 1940 von Neumann lectured on measure theory again. The title 
of the course was Invariant measures. The notes were typed, and at 
least one copy is in the library of the Institute for Advanced Study, 
but they were never published. The main emphasis of the course was 
on measures in locally compact spaces and groups. Four of the six 
chapters are an exposition of the by now well known results of Haar 
and Weil. The other two chapters digress from the main theme, and, 
incidentally, they contain original work. Chapter II treats generalized 
limits. The first purpose of this chapter was to serve as an auxiliary 
in the proof of the existence of Haar measure, but the treatment is 
much more comprehensive than that single application requires. 
Chapter VI contains a construction of Haar measure by means of 
"approximately equi-distributed" finite sets; some of the results of 
this chapter were obtained in collaboration with Kakutani. 



VON NEUMANN ON MEASURE AND ERGODIC THEORY 91 

We come now to von Neumann s work on ergodic theory. The 
major part of this work was done in the early 1930s; with one excep 
tion all his publications on the subject appeared in 1932. 

Modern ergodic theory started early in 1931 with a most significant 
observation made by Koopman [3]. The observation is that the 
functional operator induced by a measure-preserving transformation 
is unitary. If, in other words, T is a measure-preserving transforma 
tion on some measure space, and if for every square-integrable func 
tion / on that space a new square-integrable function Uf is defined 
by (Uf)(x) =f(Tx), then U is a unitary operator on LZ. By this time 
von Neumann had written his epoch-making articles on operator 
theory and he knew everything about the subject that was then 
known. Koopman s observation was simultaneously a challenge and 
a hint. If there is an intimate connection between measure-preserving 
transformations and unitary operators, then the known analytic 
theory of such operators must surely give some information about 
the geometric behavior of the transformations. By October of 1931 
von Neumann had the answer; the answer was the mean ergodic 
theorem. 

As stated nowadays, the mean ergodic theorem says that if U is a 
unitary operator on a Hilbert space H, then the sequence of averages 

-(/+ Uf+ + C/"- 1 /) 
n 

is strongly convergent for every / in H. (The mean ergodic theorem 
also says something about what the limit has to be, and the con 
vergence assertion can just as well be made for suitable one-parameter 
families [Ut\ in place of the sequences { U n }. These refinements are 
irrelevant in a summary such as the present one and will be sys 
tematically ignored.) In von Neumann s first note [s] on the subject 
the theorem was not stated in this abstract form; he emphasized the 
measure-theoretic roots of the result throughout. A reader of the 
note could have followed the entire argument, involving continual 
references to the underlying measure space, without ever becoming 
aware that the proof proved a more abstract theorem than the state 
ment stated. 

Shortly after von Neumann proved the mean ergodic theorem he 
discussed it with G. D. Birkhoff, and shortly after that Birkhoff 
proved the "individual" ergodic theorem [l]. (The order of events as 
here stated would be impossible to guess from the dates appearing 
on the various publications; the priority situation is explained in a 



92 P. R. HALMOS 

subsequent note [2] of Birkhoff and Koopman.) The difference be 
tween von Neumann s result and BirkhofFs is easy to describe; the 
former states that for suitable functions the sequence of averages 



is convergent in the mean of order 2, whereas the latter states that 
the same sequence is convergent for almost every x. Thus Birkhoff s 
result is inextricably tied up with measure; von Neumann s can be 
(and repeatedly has been) generalized to Banach spaces and other 
axiomatic contexts. It is therefore curious, but true, that von Neu 
mann always looked at ergodic theory as a part of measure theory; he 
never worked on the abstract versions. What fascinated him most 
was the delicate interplay between measure and spectrum. The 
ergodic theorem itself (mean or individual) was almost never needed 
in his later work; its main role was that of historical justification for 
studying measure-preserving transformations. 

To understand the nature of von Neumann s profound insights 
into the structure of measure-preserving transformations, let us look 
at some of the most striking and typical ones. For simplicity of state 
ment we restrict attention to measure spaces of total measure 1 ; with 
a little care many of the results can be extended to infinite spaces. 

Associated with every measure space there is a measure algebra, 
namely the Boolean algebra of measurable sets modulo sets of meas 
ure zero. A measure-preserving transformation of the space induces 
in a natural way a measure-preserving automorphism of the algebra. 
In highly pathological measure spaces it can happen [18] that the 
space has fewer transformations than the algebra has automorphisms, 
i.e., that not every measure-preserving automorphism is induced by a 
measure-preserving transformation. If the underlying measure space 
is subjected to some rather reasonable topological and metric condi 
tions, then the pathology cannot happen. Von Neumann s proof of 
this useful fact [ll] is a frightfully complicated set-theoretic argu 
ment. The result has not yet been improved in any essential way. 

The most interesting measure-preserving transformations are the 
ergodic ones; ergodicity is the natural measure-theoretic generaliza 
tion of the concept of transitivity that occurs in the theory of per 
mutation groups. (To be precise, T is ergodic if and only if the only 
measurable sets invariant under T are the sets of measure zero and 
their complements.) In his longest and most diversified paper on 
ergodic theory [12] von Neumann showed that on suitably restricted 
spaces every measure-preserving transformation can be decomposed 



VON NEUMANN ON MEASURE AND ERGODIC THEORY 93 

into ergodic pieces. The theorem is a forerunner of many such de 
composition (or "direct integral") theorems. 

The mixing theorem (obtained in collaboration with Koopman 
[9]) is a typical example of the measure-versus-spectrum type of 
result; it asserts that a geometric property of T (mixing) is equivalent 
to a spectral property of U (no nontrivial proper values). In some 
what informal but quite suggestive language, the mixing theorem 
says that a necessary and sufficient condition that each pair of sets 
be eventually stochastically independent is that the spectrum be 
essentially continuous. 

There is also a beautiful result about the very opposite situation 
in which U has pure point spectrum (i.e., L 2 has an orthonormal 
basis consisting of proper vectors of U). For ergodic transformations 
of this kind it turns out [12] that the spectrum, which is always a 
subset of the set of complex numbers of modulus 1, is in fact a sub 
group of the multiplicative group of such numbers, and every such 
subgroup is the spectrum of some such transformation. Even more is 
true; the Koopman program is really fulfilled here. If both 5 and T 
satisfy the conditions (ergodic, pure point spectrum) then a necessary 
and sufficient condition for the measure-theoretic isomorphism of 6" 
and T is the unitary equivalence of the corresponding unitary opera 
tors. In other words, for a special but large class of transformations 
the analytic (operator) methods give complete information about the 
geometric (transformation) questions. 

This concludes our summary of von Neumann s contributions to 
measure and ergodic theory. In quantity these contributions amount 
roughly to one tenth of von Neumann s scientific publications. As to 
their quality, it seems to be safe to say that if von Neumann had 
never done anything else, they would have been sufficient to guaran 
tee him mathematical immortality. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

[Except for three notes by Birkhoff and Koopman, added for historical reasons, 
what follows is a complete list of von Neumann s publications on measure theory and 
on the mathematical aspects of ergodic theory. Xot every item in the list is referred 
to in the text.] 

1. G. D. Birkhoff, Proof of the ergodic theorem, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. vol. 17 (1931) 
pp. 656-660. 

2. G. D. Birkhoff and B. O. Koopman, Recent contributions to the ergodic theory, 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. vol. 18 (1932) pp. 279-282. 

3. B. O. Koopman, Ham-ill onian systems and transformations in Hilbert space, 
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. vol. 17 (1931) pp. 315-318. 

4. John von Neumann, Die Zerlegung eines Intervalles in abzahlbar viele kongruente 
Teilmengen, Fund. Math. vol. 11 (1928) pp. 230-238. 



94 P. R. HALMOS 

5. , Zur allgemeinen Theorie des Masses, Fund. Math. vol. 13 (1929) pp. 

73-116. 

6. , Zusatz zur Arbeit "Zur allgemeinen Theorie des Masses," Fund. Math. 

vol. 13 (1929) p. 333. 

7. - , Algebraiscbe Reprasentanten der Funktionen "bis auf eine Menge vom 
Masse Null," J. Reine Angew. Math. vol. 165 (1931) pp. 109-115. 

8. - , Proof of the quasi-ergodic hypothesis, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. vol. 18 
(1932) pp. 70-82. 

9. and B. O. Koopman, Dynamical systems of continuous spectra, Proc. 

Nat. Acad. Sci. vol. 18 (1932) pp. 255-263. 

10. - , Physical applications of the ergodic hypothesis, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 
vol. 18 (1932) pp. 263-266. 

11. - , Einige Satze iiber messbare Abbildungen, Ann. of Math. vol. 33 (1932) 
pp. 574-586. 

12. - , Zur Operatorenmethode in der klassischen Mechanik, Ann. of Math, 
vol. 33 (1932) pp. 587-642. 

13. , Zusdtze zur Arbeit u Zur Operatorenmethode . . . ," Ann. of Math. vol. 

33 (1932) pp. 789-791. 

14. , Zum Haarschen Mass in Topologischen Gruppen, Compositio Math. 

vol. 1 (1934) pp. 106-114. 

15. and M. H. Stone, The determination of representative elements in the 

residual classes of a Boolean algebra, Fund. Math. vol. 25 (1935) pp. 353-378. 

16. , The uniqueness of Haar s measure, Mat. Sbornik vol. 1 (1936) pp. 

721-734. 

17. - , On rings of operators. Ill, Ann. of Math. vol. 41 (1940) pp. 94-161. 

18. and P. R. Halmos, Operator methods in classical mechanics, II, Ann. of 

Math. vol. 43 (1942) pp. 332-350. 

19. , Functional operators. I. Measures and integrals, Princeton, 1950. 

UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO AND 

INSTITUTE FOR ADVANCED STUDY 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS TO 
QUANTUM THEORY 

LEON VAN HOVE 

That von Neumann has been "par excellence" the mathematician 
of quantum mechanics is as obvious to every physicist now as it was 
a quarter of a century ago. Quantum mechanics was very fortunate 
indeed to attract, in the very first years after its discovery in 1925, 
the interest of a mathematical genius of von Neumann s stature. As 
a result, the mathematical framework of the theory was developed 
and the formal aspects of its entirely novel rules of interpretation 
were analyzed by one single man in two years time (19271929). 
Conversely, one could almost say in reciprocity, quantum mechanics 
introduced von Neumann into a field of mathematical investigation, 
operator theory, in which he achieved some of his most prominent 
successes. 

Von Neumann s major contributions to quantum mechanics are 
his development of the mathematical framework of the theory and 
his formal study of quantum statistics, quantum measuring processes 
and their interrelations. Whereas the latter study was essentially 
complete in 1927 (except for the quantum ergodic theorem of 1929) 
the work on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics 
came to its culmination in 1929 with the spectral theorem for hyper- 
maximal symmetric operators in Hilbert space. In the next two para 
graphs we shall discuss these major contributions. 

The mathematical framework of quantum theory. By the time von 
Neumann started his investigations on the formal framework of 
quantum mechanics this theory was known in two different mathe 
matical formulations: the "matrix mechanics" of Heisenberg, Born 
and Jordan, and the "wave mechanics" of Schrodinger. The mathe 
matical equivalence of these formulations had been established by 
Schrodinger, and they had both been embedded as special cases in a 
general formalism, often called "transformation theory," developed 
by Dirac and Jordan. This formalism, however, was rather clumsy 
and it was hampered by its reliance upon ill-defined mathematical 
objects, the famous delta-functions of Dirac and their derivatives. 
Although von Neumann himself attempted at first, in collaboration 
with Hilbert and Nordheim [l], to edify the quantum-mechanical 

Received by the editors December 23, 1957. 




96 LEON VAN HOVE 

formalism along similar lines, he soon realized that a much more 
natural framework was provided by the abstract, axiomatic theory of 
Hilbert spaces and their linear operators [2]. This mathematical 
formulation of quantum mechanics, whereby states of the physical 
system are described by Hilbert space vectors and measurable quan 
tities by hermitian operators acting upon them, has been very suc 
cessful indeed. Unchanged in its essentials it has survived the two 
great extensions which quantum theory was to undergo soon: the 
relativistic quantum mechanics of particles (Dirac equation) and the 
quantum theory of fields. 

One might of course remark that Dirac s delta functions and their 
derivatives, although poorly denned at the time of their introduction, 
have been recognized since as bona fide mathematical entities in L. 
Schwartz theory of distributions. This is quite true and moreover 
these functions have been used continually by physicists throughout 
the development of quantum theory, in particular in the last two 
decades for the study of scattering processes and of quantized fields. 
Delta functions have established themselves as the natural tool when 
ever operators with continuous spectra are to be considered. This 
does not affect in any way, however, the fact that the axiomatically 
defined separable Hilbert space is the suitable framework for the 
quantum-mechanical formalism as we know it today, and the recog 
nition of this fact we owe to von Neumann. 

An essential feature of the Hilbert space formulation of quantum 
theory is that the most important physical quantities as position, 
momentum or energy are represented by unbounded hermitian oper 
ators. Since the theoretical prediction of measurements makes es 
sential use of the spectral resolution of the operators representing the 
physical quantities, von Neumann was, in his very first investiga 
tion [2], faced with the problem of extending to the unbounded case 
the known spectral theory of bounded hermitian operators. By 1929 
he had brought this problem to a complete solution [3]. He intro 
duced the all-important concept of hypermaximal symmetric oper 
ator, being the most general hermitian operator with a spectral reso 
lution. This work, the results of which were reached independently 
by M. H. Stone [4], was for von Neumann the starting point of a 
long series of investigations on linear operators in Hilbert space. 

Still another contribution of von Neumann to the mathematical 
foundation of quantum theory is worth mentioning here. He estab 
lished the important theorem that (in the irreducible case and after 
a suitable reformulation) the canonical commutation rules QjPi PiQj 
= n idji determine the operators Qi, - - , Q n , PI, - , P n uniquely 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS TO QUANTUM THEORY 97 

except for an arbitrary transformation [5]. Although rarely quoted 
as such, this theorem, which was already known to Dirac and Stone 
[6], is really fundamental for the understanding of many quantum- 
mechanical investigations where the theoretical analysis is exclusively 
based on the canonical commutation rules in their above form or in 
the equivalent field-theoretical form 

A;Af - AfAj = fid jt , 



Statistical aspects of quantum theory. In the course of his formula 
tion of quantum mechanics in terms of vectors and operators of Hil- 
bert space von Neumann also gave in complete generality the basic 
statistical rule of interpretation of the theory. This rule concerns 
the result of the measurement of a given physical quantity on a sys 
tem in a given quantum state and expresses its probability distribu 
tion by means of a simple and now completely familiar formula in 
volving the vector representing the state and the spectral resolution 
of the operator which represents the physical quantity [2]. This 
statistical rule, originally proposed by Born in 1926, was for von 
Neumann the starting point of a mathematical analysis of quantum 
mechanics in entirely probabilistic terms. The analysis, carried out 
in a paper of 1927 [7], introduced the concept of statistical matrix 
for the description of an ensemble of systems which are not necessarily 
all in the same quantum state. The statistical matrix (now often 
called p-matrix although von Neumann s notation was U) has become 
one of the major tools of quantum statistics and it is through this 
contribution that von Neumann s name became familiar to even the 
least mathematically minded physicists. 

In the same paper von Neumann also investigates a problem which 
is still now the subject of much discussion, viz., the theoretical de 
scription of the quantum-mechanical measuring process and of the 
noncausal elements which it involves. Mathematically speaking von 
Neumann s study of this delicate question is quite elegant. It pro 
vides a clear-cut formal framework for the numerous investigations 
which were needed to clarify physically the all-important implications 
of quantum phenomena for the nature of physical measurements, the 
most essential of which is Niels Bohr s concept of complementarity. 

The results of the paper just discussed were immediately used by 
the author to lay the foundation for quantum thermodynamics [s]. 
He gave the quantum analogue 

S = k Sp (p In p), p statistical matrix, 

of the well known classical formula for the entropy 



98 LEON VAN HOVE 

S= k I /ln/dco, / distribution function in phase space. 

He further wrote down the density matrix for a canonical ensemble 
at temperature T: 

p = Z- 1 exp (-H/kT}, Z = Sp [exp (-H/kT)], 

H being the Hamilton operator. Two years later von Neumann came 
back to quantum thermodynamics with a contribution to a much 
more difficult problem: the formulation and proof of an ergodic theo 
rem for quantum systems [9J. The basic principle of this work is to 
define quantum analogues of cells in phase space by considering sets 
of quantum states for which all macroscopic quantities have given 
values within a certain inaccuracy. One further considers the unitary 
transformation u relating these quantum states to the eigenstates of 
the hamiltonian. The ergodicity is then established for "almost every" 
value of the transformation u. Although the latter restriction is a 
rather unsatisfactory one from the physical standpoint, one must 
consider von Neumann s ergodic theorem as one of the very few im 
portant contributions to a most difficult subject which even now is 
far from complete clarification. 

Most of the work we have briefly reviewed has been republished 
by the author, in greatly expanded form, as a book which rapidly 
became and still is the standard work on the mathematical founda 
tions of quantum mechanics [lO], Von Neumann devoted in his book 
considerable attention to a point which had not been discussed in 
the 1927 papers and which was later the subject of much controversy. 
It is the question of the possible existence of "hidden variables," the 
consideration of which would eliminate the noncausal element in 
volved in the measuring process. Von Neumann could show that 
hidden parameters with this property cannot exist if the basic struc 
ture of quantum theory is retained. Although he mentioned the latter 
restriction explicitly, 1 his result was often quoted without due 
reference to it, a fact which sometimes gave rise to unjustified criti 
cism in the many discussions devoted through the years to the pos 
sibility of an entirely deterministic reformulation of quantum theory. 

Other contributions. As von Neumann s complete bibliography 
will reveal, he wrote quite a few other papers on questions of quantum 
mechanics, often in collaboration with physicists, especially with 
Wigner. Most of these papers deal with technical matters and the 



1 See e.g. ref. 10, p. 109, line 17 and foil. 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS TO QUANTUM THEORY 99 

importance of the major contributions discussed above is so eminent 
that, in comparison, the other papers scope is modest. There is only 
one broad subject which we would like to mention here, because von 
Neumann, obviously giving it considerable thought, returned to it 
several times in 1934 and 1936 (in collaboration with Jordan, Wigner 
and Garrett Birkhoff). It is the question of the algebraic and logical 
structure of quantum mechanics, where the hope has existed to reach 
through abstract analysis possible generalizations of the accepted 
theory. Nobody knows whether such a hope is justified, but it is un 
doubtedly a natural one and it has appealed to many other people, 
giving one more example of the power and originality of von Neu 
mann s thinking. 

REFERENCES 

1. D. Hilbert, J. von Neumann and L. Nordheim, fiber die Grundlagen der Quan- 
tenmechanik, Math. Ann. vol. 98 (1927) pp. 1-30. 

2. J. von Neumann, Mathematische Begriindung der Quantenmechanik, Nachr. 
Ges. Wiss. Gottingen (1927) pp. 1-57. 

3. - , Allgemeine Eigenuuerttheorie Hermitischer Funktionaloperatoren, Math. 
Ann. vol. 102 (1929) pp. 49-131. 

4. M. H. Stone, Linear transformations in Hilbert space and their applications to 
analysis, Amer. Math. Soc. Colloquium Publications, vol. 15, 1932. 

5. J. von Neumann, Die Eindeutigkeit der Schrodingerschen Operator -en, Math. 
Ann. vol. 104 (1931) pp. 570-578. 

6. P. A. M. Dirac, The principles of quantum mechanics, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 
1930, 29. 

M. H. Stone, Linear transformations in Hilbert space. Operational methods and 
group theory, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 16 (1930) pp. 172-175. 

7. J. von Neumann, Wahrschtinlichkeitstheoretischer Aufbau der Quantenme- 
chanik, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen (1927) pp. 245-272. 

8. , Thermodynamik quantenmechanischer Gesamtheiten, Nachr. Ges Wiss. 

Gottingen (1927) pp. 273-291. 

9. , Beiveis des Ergodensatzes und des H-Theorems in der neuen Mechanik, 

Zeitschrift fiir Physik, vol. 57 (1929) pp. 30-70. 

10. - , Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, Berlin, J. Springer, 
1932. 

INSTITUTE FOR THEORETICAL PHYSICS OF THE UNIVERSITY, 
UTRECHT, NETHERLANDS 



JOHN VON NEUMANN S WORK IN THE THEORY OF 
GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 

H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

Of the many areas of mathematics shaped by his genius, none 
shows more clearly the influence of John von Neumann than the 
Theory of Games. This modern approach to problems of competition 
and cooperation was given a broad foundation in his superlative paper 
of 1928 [A]. 1 In scope and youthful vigor this work can be compared 
only to his papers of the same period on the axioms of set theory and 
the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. A decade later, 
when the Austrian economist Oskar Morgenstern came to Princeton, 
von Neumann s interest in the theory was reawakened. The result of 
their active and intensive collaboration during the early years of 
World War II was the treatise Theory of games and economic behavior 
[D], in which the basic structure of the 1928 paper is elaborated and 
extended. Together, the paper and treatise contain a remarkably 
complete outline of the subject as we know it today, and every writer 
in the field draws in some measure upon concepts which were there 
united into a coherent theory. 

The crucial innovation of von Neumann, which was to be both the 
keystone of his Theory of Games and the central theme of his later 
research in the area, was the assertion and proof of the Minimax 
Theorem. Ideas of pure and randomized strategies had been intro 
duced earlier, especially by fimile Borel [3J. However, these efforts 
were restricted either to individual examples or, at best, to zero-sum 
two-person games with skew-symmetric payoff matrices. To para 
phrase his own opinion expressed in [j], von Neumann did not view 
the mere desire to mathematize strategic concepts and the straight 
formal definition of a pure strategy as the main agenda of an "initi 
ator" in the field, but felt that there was nothing worth publishing 
until the Minimax Theorem was proved. 

As the leitmotiv of this article, the Minimax Theorem requires at 
least informal statement at the outset. (A later section will present 

Received by the editors February 21, 1958. 

1 There are two bibliographies at the end of this article, one of von Neumann s 
work in the field and the second for other references. Letters in square brackets refer 
to the von Neumann bibliography and numbers in square brackets refer to the other 
bibliography. 




THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 101 

its mathematical structure in greater detail.) For any finite zero-sum 
two-person game in a normalized form, it asserts the existence of a 
unique numerical value, representing a gain for one player and a loss 
for the other, such that each can achieve at least this favorable an 
expectation from his own point of view by using a randomized (or 
mixed) strategy of his own choosing. Such strategies for the two 
players are termed optimal strategies and the unique numerical value, 
the minimax value of the game. This is the starting point of the von 
Neumann-Morgenstern solution for cooperative games, where all 
possible partitions of the players into two coalitions are considered 
and the reasonable aspirations of the opposing coalitions in each par 
tition measured by the minimax value of the strictly competitive two- 
party struggle between them. In the area of extensive games, the 
solution of games with perfect information by means of pure strat 
egies assumes importance only by contrast to the necessity of ran 
domizing in the general case. The Minimax Theorem reappears in a 
new guise, when von Neumann turned to analyze a linear model of 
production. Finally, in the hands of von Neumann, it was the source 
of a broad spectrum of technical results, ranging from his extensions 
of the Brouwer fixed point theorem, developed for its proof, to new 
and unexpected methods for combinatorial problems. 

In the attempt to encompass von Neumann s broad, yet detailed, 
contributions to game theory and mathematical economics, this arti 
cle is divided into two main parts. The first deals with conceptual in 
novations that are rather strictly bound to the context of game theory 
and linear economic theory. The second deals in stricter detail with 
more technical results and computational methods centered on the 
Minimax Theorem, but of interest in themselves, and also with vari 
ous mathematical ramifications. 

PART I. CONCEPTUAL INNOVATIONS 

Cooperative games. Von Neumann s first attack on games that 
offer opportunities for cooperation was made in his 1928 paper [A]. 
Attempting a parallel to the minimax value for zero-sum two-person 
games, he sought appropriate numerical values for the players of a 
zero-sum three-person game. With coalitions possible, strictly com 
petitive conditions no longer prevail, and so he proposed a solution 
in terms of basic values for the players together with premiums and 
penalties which depend on which coalition actually forms. 

To describe this solution concept, he introduced the idea of a 
characteristic function, defined on each set 5 of players, and taking 
as a value v(S), the minimax value that 5 is assured in a zero-sum 



102 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

two-person game against the complementary set of players. Then the 
basic values for the three players in a zero-sum three-person game are 

Vl = -- (({!, 2}) + *({!, 3}) - 2*({2, 3})), 



If two players form a coalition against the third, they are each en 
titled to a premium of D/6, while the third player suffers a penalty 
of D/3, where 

D = i({l, 2}) + ({!, 3}) + t.({2, 3}). 

No further attempt was made in the 1928 paper to solve the general 
cooperative game with more than three players. However, it was con 
jectured that the characteristic function provides sufficient data for 
such a solution. The basic values proposed for n = 3 find their gen 
eralization in the Shapley value [15, Paper 17] discovered more than 
20 years later. 

The characteristic function was again the foundation for the solu 
tions proposed by von Neumann and Morgenstern for cooperative 
games. However, several new ideas are involved. The first of these is 
that of an imputation, which is a distribution of the total gain among 
the players of a game. For an w-person game, an imputation is a 
vector a = (ai t , cx n ) where cx t - denotes the share of the ith player. 
This share must be at least as much as he can win when playing 
alone and, for games in which the total amount won by the players 
is a constant c, ai+ +a n = c. Otherwise, all distributions are 
considered as possible. 

Imputations are compared by the relation of domination. An im 
putation a is said to dominate another imputation j8 if there exists a 
coalition S such that (1) a,-&gt;j8 t -for iS, and (2) the amount allotted 
to 5 by a does not exceed v(S), the amount they can assure them 
selves in play. Thus, if a dominates and if neither is ruled out by 
some accepted standard of behavior, the coalition 6" will prefer a to 
ft and has the means to enforce this preference. 

With these definitions, a von Neumann-Morgenstern solution for a 
cooperative game is not a single imputation but rather a set V of 
imputations which is without internal domination and is such that 
every imputation not in V is dominated by some imputation in V. 
Any set V of imputations which satisfies these two conditions of con- 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 103 

sistency and stability is called a solution. It is of interest to note that, 
in the 1928 solution of the zero-sum three-person game, the three 
imputations corresponding to the three possible coalitions form the 
only finite solution to this game. 

In all of the w-person games that have been investigated thus far, 
solutions have been found. Indeed, the number of solutions is em 
barrassing in the absence of a general proof of the existence of a 
solution for every w-person game. The problem may be considered 
without regard to game theory, by treating domination as an abstract 
relation on a set of points. In [D] it is shown that, with additional 
conditions on the relation, a solution exists and is unique. In a series 
of papers [23] Moses Richardson has considerably weakened these 
conditions but, to this date, the problem has not been solved. 

Von Neumann s interest in this question never waned and he fol 
lowed closely the attempts of Shapley [15, Paper 20 ] and Gillies [15, 
Paper 19], [18] to expand the class of games for which solutions are 
known to exist. Any hope for regularity in the solution sets was 
dashed by Shapley, who has shown [is] that an n-person game can be 
constructed with a solution containing an arbitrary closed set as iso 
lated component in an (n 3)-dimensional subset of the space of 
imputations. 

At this point it seems of interest to mention some remarks made 
by von Neumann at Princeton, February 1, 1955, as chairman of a 
round-table discussion of research in w-person games. We quote 
(freely) from Philip Wolfe s report: 

"Yon Neumann pointed out that the enormous variety of solutions which may ob 
tain for n-person games was not surprising in view of the correspondingly enormous 
variety of observed stable social structures; many differing conventions can endure, 
existing today for no better reason than that they were here yesterday. It is, therefore, 
still of primary importance to settle the general question of the existence of a solution 
for any n-person game. Another gap in present knowledge pertains to the formation 
of the equilibria constituting the solution of an w-person game; even the beginning of 
a dynamic theory is lacking. 

"Von Neumann then outlined the program of a new approach to the cooperative 
game by means of some (not yet constructed) theory of the rules of games. A class of 
admissible extensions of the rules of the won-cooperative game would be denned to 
cover communication, negotiation, side payments, etc. It should be possible to deter 
mine when one admissible extension was stronger than another, and the game cor 
respondingly more cooperative. The goal would be to find a maximal extension of 
rules: A set of rules such that the non-cooperative solutions for that game do not 
change under any stronger set. If this were possible, it would seem the ideal way in 
which to solve the completely cooperative game." 

Roughly two-thirds of the more than 600 pages of the von Xeu- 
mann-Morgenstern treatise [D] are devoted to cooperative games. 
They contain a wide assortment of concepts and techniques, too 



104 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

wide to be treated with any justice here. For a balanced appraisal 
which relates von Neumann s work quite clearly to the later con 
tributions it inspired, the reader is referred to the recent book of 
R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa [l7]. This presents an invaluable survey 
of the current state of the Theory of Games, especially cooperative 
ones. 

Extensive games. Throughout von Neumann s work there is evi 
dence of a strong drive to supply rigorous axiomatic foundations for 
the subjects which he treated. For game theory, his contribution of 
this sort was a set-theoretical formulation of a very wide class of 
finite games. When presented in terms of this system, a game is said 
to be in extensive form. Although the extensive description of a game 
is stripped of all the technical apparatus peculiar to the particular 
game, it retains the full combinatorial complexity of play according to 
the original rules. As such, it is in contrast with the so-called normal 
ized form, with but one choice per player, that results when the game 
is simplified through the introduction of pure strategies. 

Von Neumann s achievements in this direction were many. First, 
and most important, he recognized the necessity of characterizing 
games of strategy in an unequivocal manner; otherwise the field 
would necessarily remain a mere collection of examples. This program 
he carried out in masterful style, so that the essential elements which 
he isolated, such as play, chance and personal moves, payoffs, and 
information partitions, are still the starting points of any description 
of a game. It is difficult to appreciate, in retrospect, the genius of von 
Neumann s abstraction of the essential elements of a general game of 
strategy into a mathematical system. For this area, perhaps more 
than any other he worked in, had little mathematical tradition. Yet 
the mathematical system he created has served as a rallying point 
for much mathematical research which otherwise would not have been 
possible. 

He placed in bold relief the pioneering theorem that every game 
with perfect information has a minimax solution in pure strategies. 
This theorem, used implicitly by many writers, could have no general 
proof until the theory of extensive games was on sound footing. By 
repeated emphasis, he underlined the role of incomplete information 
as the source of many interesting game-theoretic results. The ability 
to describe rigorously the state of information at each move in a 
game, separating out "inferences" and "signals," and to construct 
strategies which take full account of this information had a decisive 
role in the development of a theory of extensive games. 

It is instructive to contrast the treatments of extensive games given 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 105 

in the 1928 paper and in the 1944 treatise. Although a full discussion 
was not possible within the restricted length of the 1928 paper, one 
feels that von Neumann slighted the problem of characterizing stra 
tegic games in his zeal to reach his main goal at that time, the Mini- 
max Theorem. However, external evidence is available to show that 
the problem was of interest to him in that period. It is known that 
von Neumann suggested to D. Konig [ll] before 1927 the applica 
tion of a graph-theoretical result to show the finiteness of a game with 
a stop rule and, from the same Konig paper, that he had corrected 
an error in the Zermelo proof of the pure-strategy determinateness of 
chess [30]. Also, a paper of L. Kalmar [8], provides the information 
that at the same time he had formulated and proved the minimax 
solution (strict determinateness) in pure strategies of the general 
game with perfect information. 

The class of games normalized in the 1928 paper is restricted to 
those finite games in which a player knows, at the occasion of a 
choice, either everything or nothing about the anterior choices. At 
the urging of Morgenstern this class was widened in the 1944 treatise, 
through a new formulation in terms of partitions of moves, to include 
games in which there may be only partial information about prior 
choices. (The work on this chapter, as on many others in the book, 
continued from breakfast through evening parties. Once, exasperated 
with the persistence of the collaborators, Klara von Neumann de 
clared that she would have nothing more to do with the Theory of 
Games unless it "included an elephant." It does, on page 64 of [D].) 

By and large, subsequent work on extensive games proceeded from 
ideas initiated by von Neumann. Among predominant lines, one may 
cite the literature on games with perfect information [15, Papers 
11, 12, 13; 4, Papers 6-1 1] and on the concept of behavior strategies 
[15, Papers 11, 14, 15] introduced by von Neumann in his analysis of 
poker. 

Poker. Chess, Poker and Bridge are familiar games in extensive 
form which exhibit three quite distinct levels of information structure. 
Chess is a game of perfect information; in theory, as remarked above, 
it possesses a strictly determined solution in pure strategies. Poker 
has imperfect information but perfect recall by each player; it pos 
sesses a strictly determined solution in behavior (i.e. locally random 
ized) strategies. Bridge has imperfect information and even imper 
fect recall; it may be strictly determined only in mixed (i.e. fully 
randomized) strategies, as shown in a highly simplified instance ana 
lyzed by G. L. Thompson [15, Paper 15]. 

Poker provides a superb laboratory example for game theory be- 



106 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

cause its decisive strategic characteristics, centered on "Bluffing" 
phenomena, can be conserved in suitably simplified variants that 
have extensive forms of reasonable complexity. Indeed, it seems that 
many of von Neumann s initial ideas on game theory were shaped by 
his analysis of two-person variants of Poker during the fruitful years 
1926-1928 (see footnote on page 186 of [D]). This systematic analysis 
occupies a major portion of Chapter IV of the von Neumann- 
Morgenstern treatise [D] as well as a lengthy supplement which 
D. B. Gillies and J. P. Mayberry helped prepare for belated publica 
tion [l]. There von Neumann achieved an exact theory which reduced 
the maneuvers of Bluffing to quantitative terms and disentangled 
mixed psychological motives by relating them to the main strategic 
features of the game. Not only do his minimax solutions of Poker 
variants prescribe Bluffing as a rational activity, rather than a psy 
chic one, but they also specify, in general, definite probabilities with 
which Bluffing should be employed at each opportunity. This was a 
major "break-through" which even the layman may be expected to 
appreciate, judging by various magazine articles and a fine popular 
book [19]. 

An important technical feature of von Neumann s work on Poker 
was his successful determination of minimax solutions through use 
of locally randomized strategies, now known as behavior strategies. 
Later research [15, Paper 11 ] has shown that such randomization, 
usually much simpler than overall randomization by mixed strategies, 
is sufficient to determine strictly the minimax solution of any game 
with perfect recall. Another technical feature was the replacement for 
computational convenience of the finite discrete scale of Poker hands 
by an infinite linear continuum. This seems to have been von Neu 
mann s only venture into infinite or continuous games. However, 
since his Poker games were not in normalized form, their infinite 
nature had no direct bearing on the abundant work in infinite games 
carried on by Ville [26], Wald [28], and others (see for example [14, 
Papers 12-15; 15, Papers 6-10]). (Von Neumann closed the 1955 
round-table discussion mentioned above with the joking remark, 
"Don t blame me for infinite games!") 

An additional instance of the value of Poker as a laboratory exam 
ple is the three-person Poker variant analyzed by J. F. Nash and 
L. S. Shapley [14, Paper 10]. This helped shape the Nash theory of 
equilibrium points for noncooperative w-person games [20 J. 

Utility. The fundamental problem of the theory of games is to find 
the methods by which a player can obtain a "most favorable result." 
At first, von Neumann identified the "most favorable result" with 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 107 

the greatest expected (monetary) value [A, p. 298], remarking that 
this or some similar assumption was necessary in order to apply the 
methods of probability theory. While doing so, he was well aware of 
the objections to the principle of maximizing expected winnings as a 
prescription for behavior, but wished to concentrate on other prob 
lems. To state some of these objects and the contributions made by 
von Neumann when he returned to the problem, consider the follow 
ing situation: Let a player be required to choose an element x from 
a set X and let f(x) be the monetary payoff resulting from this act. 
If the player always prefers more money to less, then the rule for be 
havior is clear in this situation of certainty, namely, choose x so as 
to maximize f(x) if possible. 

If this situation is now altered so as to introduce risk, say by en 
larging X to the set of all probability distributions on X, the rule is 
no longer obvious. If the index /(jc) is extended to probability mix 
tures by setting it equal to the mathematical expectation E(f(x)), 
the principle of maximizing expected winnings does not reflect the 
preferences of many people. To express the classical example of the 
St. Petersburg paradox in these terms, set X= JO, 1, , n, J 
with /(0)=0 and f(n)=2 n c for n&gt;0, where = represents the 
status quo and c stands for the entry fee. The rule of maximizing ex 
pected winnings prefers the probability distribution p n = l/2 n for 
n&gt;0 to the status quo n = with certainty, no matter how large the 
entry fee c. However, numerical examples persuade many people of 
the advantages of the status quo; for example, with c=$128, there 
is but one chance in 64 that a player who chooses the probability 
mixture will break even, and he will otherwise lose at least $64. If 
the game is to be played but once, only the most foolhardy (or 
wealthy) would assume this risk for the prospect of highly improbable 
winnings. 

To resolve this paradox, Daniel Bernoulli suggested that people do 
not follow monetary value as an index for preferences, but rather the 
"moral worth" of the money. Furthermore, in a situation involving 
risk, they seek to maximize the expected value of moral worth, or 
what has been called "moral expectation." Finally, he proposed a 
quite serviceable function to measure the moral worth of an amount 
of money, namely, its logarithm. 

Whatever the defects of this function as a universal measure of 
preferences, and they are many, it raises the question of the existence 
of a numerical index which will reflect accurately the choices of an 
individual in situations of risk. Interest in this problem as posed was 
first shown by F. P. Ramsey [22] who went beyond Bernoulli in 



108 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

that he defined utility operationally in terms of individual behavior. 
(Once von Neumann was asked why he did not refer to the work of 
Ramsey, which might have been known to someone conversant with 
the field of logic. He replied that, after Godel published his papers 
on undecidability and the incompleteness of logic, he did not read 
another paper in symbolic logic.) Independently, von Neumann con 
fronted this problem with Morgenstern in [D], while they were laying 
the bases for the theory of games. Informally, they showed that if a 
player is able to express his preferences between every possible pair of 
probability mixtures of outcomes in a consistent manner, then there 
exists a utility function defined on the possible outcomes, the ex 
pected value of which can be used as a guide to the player s choices 
in situations of risk. Precisely, they proved the following theorem. 

Let X= {x, y, z, } be a set on which a preference relation &gt; 
is defined satisfying: 

(1) For all x and y in X, exactly one of the following holds: 
x=y, x&gt; y, y&gt; x. 

(2) If x &gt; y and y &gt; z then x &gt; z. 

Let an operation be defined for all x and y in X and all real numbers 
a, 0&lt;a&lt;l, yielding otx + (l a)y, an element of X and satisfying: 

(3) ax + (l-a)y = (l-a)y+ax. 

(4) afc+(l-fiy)+(l-a)y-(ap)x+(l-any. 

Here + is part of a formal operational symbol. Let the operation and 
the preference relation jointly satisfy: 

(5) If x&gt; y then x&gt; CLX-\-(\ d}y&gt;y for all a. 

(6) If x&gt;y&gt;z, then there exist a and /3 such that ax-\-(\oi)z&gt; y 



Then there exists a real valued function u defined on X and satisfy 
ing: 

(7) lix&gt;y then u(x)&gt;u(y). 

(8) For all x, y and a, u(ax + (l -a)y) =au(x) +(1 -a)u(y). This 
utility function is unique to a positive linear transformation. 

The proof of this theorem appears in the second and third editions 
of [D]. Although von Neumann was never satisfied with the form of 
this proof, a detailed analysis of cases, it was available at the time 
of the first edition and was added at the insistence of Morgenstern 2 
who found that economists were not convinced that a rigorous proof 
could be given. 

The reexamination of the utility concept by von Neumann and 

2 Professor Morgenstern reports that the article of Karl Menger, Das Unsicher- 
heitsmoment in der Wertlehre, Z. Nationalokonomie vol. 5 (1934) pp. 459-485, played 
a primary role in persuading von Neumann to undertake a formal treatment of utility. 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 109 

Morgenstern stimulated activity in this area by economists, statis 
ticians, and mathematicians. An excellent review of the economic 
literature is given by Arrow [l]. The point of view of subjective 
probability is set forth by Savage [24 ]. New axiom systems for util 
ity theory have been developed by Hausner [5] and Herstein and 
Milnor [6J. 

Economic equilibrium. Parallel to his interest in the mathematical 
treatment of competitive economic situations by means of games of 
strategy, von Neumann was concerned with the formulation of mod 
els of general economic equilibrium. In 1932, he presented an eco 
nomic model of his own devising at a colloquium in Princeton. This 
paper (published in [B] and translated in [C]), together with work of 
Wald [27] marks a new era in mathematical economics in which 
rigorous arguments replace mere "equation counting" as a means of 
establishing the existence of economic equilibrium. It also shares with 
YVald s work the credit for recognizing explicitly that inequalities as 
well as equations are forced on the system by the economic context, 
and for utilizing this fact to advantage in the mathematical treat 
ment. In its linear approach to production, with alternative processes 
and the possibility of intermediate goods, it is the direct ancestor of 
linear programming and activity analysis. 

The system is a closed pure production model in which n goods are 
produced by m processes in discrete time periods, with the outputs of 
one period the inputs of the next. Constant returns to scale are as 
sumed as well as the unlimited availability of natural materials of 
production. The problem is: given m by n matrices A and B whose 
nonnegative elements a,-y and ,-,- specify the amounts of the jth good 
consumed and produced by the ith process operating at unit intensity 
over one time period, it is required to find the intensity (row) vector 
x t the price (column) vector y, the expansion factor a and the interest 
factor /3 that together make for economic equilibrium. The m non- 
negative components of x are the intensities at which the various 
processes are operated, the n components of xB the resulting amounts 
of the various goods produced in a given time period, and the n com 
ponents of axA the resulting amounts of the various goods consumed 
in the next period. Since the economy is "closed," it is required that 

xB - axA ^ 0. 

If a good is overproduced, its price is to be zero. The n nonnegative 
components of y are the prices assigned to the various goods, the m 
components of By the resulting revenues from the various processes 
in a given time period, and the m components of (3Ay the resulting 



110 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

input costs for the various processes in the next period. Since the 
economy is "profitless," it is required that 

By - Ay ^ 0. 

If an activity operates at a loss, its intensity is to be zero. 

To ensure that the economy does not decompose into groups of 
goods without interactions, von Neumann assumed that every good 
appears in every activity, either as an input or output, i.e. 

A + B &gt; 0. 

With this condition, he showed that a uniformly expanding economy 
is possible and that the factors of expansion and of interest are neces 
sarily equal. 

The relations between this theorem and the Minimax Theorem 
are close and somewhat unexpected. If the intensity and price vec 
tors x and y are both normalized so that components sum to one, 
they form probability vectors which may be regarded as mixed strat 
egies for the players of a zero-sum two-person game with payoff 
matrix B \A. The existence of an equilibrium with a unique com 
mon value for a and (3 is then merely the assertion that there is a 
unique choice of X(=a=j8) which makes this a "fair" game (i.e. 
value zero). This fact is established on the basis of von Neumann s 
assumption. 

At the same time, the equilibrium conditions give rise to a mini- 
max saddlepoint of 

xBy/xAy, 

the ratio of total revenue to total cost. The saddlepoints of this func 
tion reappear with a different interpretation in the work of L. S. 
Shapley on stochastic games [25]. 

The economic assumptions of this originative model have been re- 
examined recently by David Gale [16, Paper 18], and by J. G. Kem- 
eny, Oskar Morgenstern, and G. L. Thompson [9]. In independent 
work, they have relaxed the requirement A+B&gt;Q and thus are led 
into a discussion of the decomposition of the economic system and the 
possibility of nonunique factors of expansion and interest. In the 
latter paper, the connection with game theory is thoroughly explored. 

PART II. MINIMAX METHODS AND COMPUTATION 

Minimax Theorem. Let an arbitrary real m by n matrix A be 
given as the "payoff matrix" of a zero-sum two-person game in 
normalized form. Let x and y be probability vectors providing mixed 
strategies for the two players of the game: x is any row of m non- 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 111 

negative components summing to one and y any column of n nonnega- 
tive components summing to one. Then the mappings 

(1) x-+m m xA ( = minimum component of xA), 

(2) y max Ay ( = maximum components of Ay), 

(3) (x,y)-*xAy 

define three continuous functions from compact convex sets into the 
real numbers; (1) is convex piecewise-linear, (2) is concave piecewise- 
linear, and (3) is bilinear. In (1) min xA is the "floor" under the ex 
pected gains of Player I resulting from his mixed strategy x- t in 
(2), max Ay is the "ceiling" over the expected losses of Player II 
resulting from his mixed strategy y; and in (3), xAy is the expected 
value of the payoff resulting from x and y. The three functions are 
related by a combination of identities and inequalities 

min xA = min xAy ^ xAy ^ max xAy = max Ay. 

y x 

In his fundamental Minimax Theorem (the Main Theorem of the 
Theory of Games) von Neumann established the existence of a 
unique value v such that 



max (min xA) 



max 

X 



( min xAy\ 

\ v n 



; ffl ^77 



min (max Ay) 



min f max xAy ) 

v \ x / 



and some optimal (or good) mixed strategies x and 3; such that 
mmxA } ( v | Jmax Ay 
minx Ay) \xAy) Imax xAy. 

V X 

Thus 

(1) v = min xA is the maximum "floor" for Player I, 

(2) v = msix Ay is the minimum "ceiling" for Player II, 

(3) v = xAy Q is the saddlevalue of the expected payoff. 

A "solution" (x, y, v) of the "matrix game" consists of m-\-n-\-l com 
ponents which can be characterized algebraically as a solution of the 
2m + 2n linear inequalities 

* ^ 0, Ay* v, y ^ 0, x*A ^ v 
and 2 linear equations 

0000 

xi + + x m = 1, y\ + + y n = 1. 

Analytic minimax methods. The analytic proofs of the Minimax 
Theorem given by von Neumann were of two essentially different 



112 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

types. Proofs of the first type (see [A] and [B]) are based explicitly 
on extensions of the Brouwer fixed point theorem ; proofs of the sec 
ond type (see [F], [G], and [K]), while related implicitly to fixed 
point equilibria, are cast either in terms of differential equations or 
iterative approximation algorithms. 

An immediate connection between the Minimax Theorem and the 
fixed points of point-to-set functions may be seen in the following 
situation. Given a zero-sum two-person game with payoff matrix A, 
define 

F(x) = &lt;y Q \ xAf = min xAy\ , 

G(y) = &lt;x\ x Q Ay = m&xxAy&gt; . 

These sets may be called the strategies counter to x and y, respec 
tively. Then, either of the following statements is equivalent to the 
equality max x (min y xAy) = min ]/ (max z xAy): 

(a) There exists a strategy X Q such that xG(F(x)). 

(b) There exist strategies x and y Q such that 

(*, y) G G(y) X F(x ). 

These may be paraphrased by: (a) there exists a strategy x counter 
ing a strategy y which is counter to x, and (b) there exist strategies 
# and y countering each other. Either of these statements asserts 
the existence of a fixed point of a point-to-set mapping. 

Von Neumann developed the necessary fixed point theorems in two 
stages. The 1928 paper contains the following result [A, pp. 310- 
311]: Let H(x) be a continuous 3 point-to-set mapping defined on 
0^x5^1 and with closed subintervals as values. Then there exists X Q 
such that*E#(* ). 

To insure the convexity of the image sets, the notion of quasi- 
con vexity was used. (A real valued function &lt;j&gt; defined on a (convex) 
set Fin the affine space A n is said to be quasiconvex if the "level sets" 
L a = \y\$(y)**&lt;l\ are convex for all a\ if &lt;f&gt; is quasiconvex, then &lt;f&gt; 
is said to be quasiconcave.) Von Neumann proved [A, p. 309]: Let 
f(x, y) be a continuous real valued function defined on Q^x^l and 
O^y^ 1. If f(x, y) is quasiconvex in y for each x and quasiconcave in 
x for each y, then 

max min/(#, y) min max/(:r, y). 

xv yx 



8 Recall that a point-to-set mapping is continuous if its graph is closed. 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 113 

That is, a continuous game on the square with payoff quasiconvex in 
y and quasiconcave in x always has a saddlepoint in pure strategies. 
The full implications of this result were only realized in the work 
[14, Paper 15] of H. F. Bohnenblust, S. Karlin, and L. S. Shapley. 
A minimax theorem with similar assumptions has also been proved 
by H. Kneser [10]. 

The use of the weaker assumption of quasiconvexity and quasi- 
concavity (rather than the actual bilinearity of the payoff of a zero- 
sum two-person game) permitted the proof of the following stronger 
theorem by successive projections [A; p. 307]: Let/(x, y) be a con 
tinuous real valued function defined on XX Y, where X and Y are 
non-empty compact convex subsets of the affine spaces A m and A n , 
respectively. If f(x, y) is quasiconvex in y for each xX and is 
quasiconcave in x for each y Y, then 



max mmf(x, y) = min max/(#, y). 

xy y x 

The application of this theorem to the special case of zero-sum two- 
person games is clear. 

For the analysis of his expanding economy model, von Neumann 
extended his fixed point result as follows [B, p. 80]: Let F: X-*Y 
and G: Y+X be continuous point-to-set mappings defined on X 
and F, non-empty compact convex subsets of the affine spaces A m 
and A n , and taking as values compact convex subsets of Y and X, 
respectively. Then there exist x and y such that (x, y):G(y ) 
XF(x). 

Taking Y X and G(y) =y for all yG Y, we have the formulation 
of S. Kakutani [?]: Let F(x) be a continuous point-to-set mapping 
defined on X, a non-empty compact subset of A m , and taking as 
values compact convex subsets of X. Then there exists an x such that 



In view of von Neumann s deep involvement with the development 
of high speed automatic computing machinery during the postwar 
years, it is not surprising that his work on the computational prob 
lems of game theory aimed at practical numerical methods to solve 
large games on digital computers. When he made his first contribu 
tion to this area in 1948, most of the machines now widely available 
were in planning stages, or at best, in the earliest stages of construc 
tion. With this in mind, and considering our ignorance of the types 
of games (and linear programs) that would later arise for solution, 
von Neumann insisted that any algorithm should be accompanied 
by a rigorous upper bound on the number of steps, valid for all 
matrix games. 



114 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

By 1948, several abstract proofs of the Minimax Theorem were 
known. It is clear in retrospect that each of these can be transformed 
with very little difficulty into an explicit algorithm for the computa 
tion of the value of the game and its optimal strategies. If the num 
ber of alternatives for the two players are m and n with m^n, then 
the number of steps required will be some function of n, say/(), 
which goes to infinity with n. Methods which mirror the existence 
proofs entail computations with /(w) the order of 2" or n\, which are 
clearly impractical for machine computation when n is even moder 
ately large. 

Von Neumann often expressed the opinion that there are (primar 
ily heuristic) reasons to expect that the optimum /() would be a 
good deal smaller. Pointing out the parallel situation with regard to 
linear equations, and emphasizing that the solution of a matrix game 
has, as a saddlepoint problem, more stability than a system of linear 
equations, he conjectured on several occasions that the optimum /(w) 
would have the order of n*. 

The algorithm proposed in [F] leads to approximate solutions by 
an iterative procedure. To describe the essentials of this method, 
which has never been published, let A = (a#) be the m by n payoff 
matrix of a zero-sum two-person game which has been scaled so 
that 1 ^dij^ 1 for all i and j. Positive constants 6 and f being given, 
the first stage will be to compute either a mixed strategy x such that 

(1) min xA &gt; 0, or a mixed strategy y such that (2) max Ay&lt;. If 

(2) holds for a given y, then this stage ends. Otherwise, form the vec 
tor w = max (Ay, 0) from the positive components of Ay. Then 
x = u/ 2 Ui is a mixed strategy for the first player. If (1) holds for 
this x, then this stage ends. Otherwise, pick j Q such that ^ t - t -a,-y 
g -0 and set 



Define y by 

= jo, 



(1 + &lt;),/ = for 

(y 3 - 

(This procedure may be described informally as forming a mixed 
strategy for your opponent that weights his pure strategies in propor 
tions equal to your losses above a fixed level. The relative weight of 
your pure strategy that is best against this fictitious mixed strategy 
for your opponent is then increased. The choice of e, which determines 
this increase in weight, minimizes a measure of the losses incurred by 
y which is closely related to ^,- w, 2 .) 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 115 

Von Neumann obtained 
log (wwf i/f 



-log (1 - 



(where fi = max Ay) 



as a bound on the number of times this procedure may have to be re 
peated before either (1) or (2) holds. The interval (6, ") is then 
narrowed and the next stage begins. 

The final estimate of the time required for this method, for a matrix 
scaled to lie between and 1, is that the total number of multiplica 
tions required for an accuracy of 7 in the value is majorized by 
17.56w 2 w7~ 2 log (mri). Thus allowing one millisecond for a multipli 
cation, to obtain the value of a 100 by 200 game to an accuracy of 
10% would require not more than 400 days of computation. As im 
practical as this may seem, it is better than any other generally valid 
bound obtained to this date. 

In the joint paper [G] with G. W. Brown, von Neumann advanced 
a related procedure in the form of differential equations. Working 
with a symmetric game having a skew-symmetric payoff matrix 
A =(dij) and a mixed strategy y, take w = max (Ay, 0) as before. Set 
0Cv) = S u i- Then the differential equation system 

fy 

dt 

has a unique solution (for any initial conditions) with limit points y 
which solve A. These equations find a discrete analogue in the Brown 
method of "fictitious play" [12, Chapter 24] and are closely related 
to the mapping used by J. Nash [20 ] to prove the Minimax Theorem 
by a direct application of the Brouwer fixed point theorem. 

In his last published work [K] on game theory, von Neumann pre 
sented a third iterative method for solving zero-sum two-person 
games. The procedure applies to a triplet (x, y, k) consisting of two 
mixed strategies and a real number. Let u = max(Ay k, 0) and 
v = ms.x(k xA, 0). Then \[/(x, y, k) = ^f u%-{- ^y ^; = provides an 
index of the failure of the triplet to be a solution; ^ = if and only if 
(x, y, k) is a solution. A new triplet is defined as a weighted average of 
(x, y, k) with a triplet (x, y, k), where 

x = u I ]C u *&gt; y = v I S v jy an d k = xAy 



= u / 2 .-, y = * / Z . 
* i j 



(if w = 0, take any mixed strategy for x; if v = Q, take any mixed strat 
egy for y). The weighting is chosen to make i/&gt; small for the new 
triplet. After h steps, it can be shown that 



116 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 



m 



n |~ "1 

max aiy min a,-y 
_ ,y M 



and hence ^ as A &gt;oo. Again, there is provided a careful and 
generally valid bound on the time required for a given accuracy. 

Algebraic methods Duality. In contrast with the fixed-point and 
gradient methods just discussed above, there are more elementary 
means, essentially algebraic in nature, of proving the Minimax Theo 
rem and computing solutions of matrix games. These involve systems 
of linear inequalities and the related vector-space geometry of convex 
closed polyhedral sets. In the Theory of games and economic behavior 
[D, Chapter 3] von Neumann and Morgenstern develop the Mini 
max Theorem by a linear-convex algebraic approach initiated by 
Jean Ville [26 ]. (Oskar Morgenstern has told us that he drew Ville s 
article to von Neumann s attention after seeing it quite by chance 
while browsing in the library of the Institute for Advanced Study. 
They decided at once to adopt a similar elementary procedure, trying 
to make it as pictorial and simple to grasp as possible.) 

The key result in their algebraic approach is The Theorem of the 
Alternative for Matrices: 

For any (real) rectangular matrix A , there exists 
either a probability vector (row) x such that xA&gt;Q 
or a probability vector (column) y such that Ay^Q. 
In particular, if A is skew-symmetric, there must exist a probability 
vector x for which xA ^0. This establishes the Minimax Theorem for 
a symmetric game, in which the payoff matrix is skew-symmetric 
and the game value zero. For a game with arbitrary payoff matrix the 
Minimax Theorem follows from the Alternative Theorem by various 
devices, such as symmetrization (discussed below) or translation into 
a "fair" game by adding a suitable constant (negative or positive) 
to all payoffs. 

It is now known that the Alternative Theorem falls within the 
Transposition Theorem of Motzkin and is closely related to classical 
results of Farkas, Gordan and Stiemke. These theorems can be 
proved by common rational algebraic means and have the same in 
herent duality of negative-transpose nature that a game payoff- 
matrix possesses [16, Paper l]. For example, a sharpened form of the 
Alternative Theorem can be stated as follows. Let A be an arbitrary 
rectangular matrix over an ordered field and B its negative transpose 
(B = A T ). Then the dual systems 

xA 2&gt; 0, x ^ and yB ^ 0, y ^ 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 117 

possess solutions x* and y* such that 

x* A + y* &gt; and y*B + x* &gt; 0. 

In particular, if A is skew-symmetric (i.e. A =B), then the self-dual 
system xA ^0, x^O possesses a solution x* such that x*A+ #*&gt;0. 

As suggested above, the Minimax Theorem can be proved by ra 
tional algebraic means and holds for any ordered field. This was first 
specifically pointed out and carried through by Hermann Weyl [14, 
Paper 2]. Others [14, Paper 7] achieved the same end by showing 
that the solution of a game with arbitrary m by n payoff matrix A, 
easily translated to have positive value, was equivalent to the solu 
tion of a symmetric game with the skew-symmetric payoff matrix of 
order m+n + l 

A -1 
-A T 1 
_ 1 -1 OJ 

Earlier von Neumann [G, p. 76] had indicated a more natural sym- 
metrization leading to an equivalent symmetric game of order mn. 

In an unpublished working-paper [E] von Neumann indicated that 
the (analytic) problem of maximizing a linear function 



Cy = C\y\ + + Cnjn 

constrained by m-\-n linear inequalities 

Ay ^ b, y ^ 

is equivalent to the (rational algebraic) problem of solving a system 
of 2m-\-2n-\-\ linear inequalities in x and y: 

x ^ 0, Ay ^ b, y ^ 0, xA ^ c, cy ^ xb. 

This led directly into the duality and existence theorems of Linear 
Programming [12, Chapter 19] as well as relations with a "fair" 
game having the payoff matrix 

(where 5 = maxcy). 

Treating the "dual variables" (x) as nonnegative Lagrange multi 
pliers, the authors [13] went on to get analogous conditions, both 
necessary and sufficient, for maximizing a concave function con 
strained by suitable concave inequalities. 

It was observed by G. B. Dantzig [12, Chapter 20] and G. W. 



118 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

Brown that the above system of 2w + 2w-f-l linear inequalities could 
be written as 

A -b 
-A T c 
b T -c J 



0, [x, y T , 1] ^ 0. 



Since this composite matrix is skew-symmetric, it can be taken as the 
payoff matrix of a symmetric game. (Cf. the composite matrix above, 
in which A is the payoff matrix of a positively-valued game, b = l and 
c = 1.) Thus, the solution of a pair of dual linear programs, if both are 
feasible, can be related to the solution of a symmetric game. 

The duality between opponents in a matrix game and between dual 
linear programs bears striking resemblance to the duality in the von 
Neumann economic model [B; C], discussed above, between the in 
tensity vector x and expansion factor a on the one hand and the price 
vector y and the interest factor ft on the other. However, the solution 
of the economic model cannot be achieved in general by rational 
algebraic means; a solution with irrational components can arise 
from rational matrices A and B. It is interesting to note that a sim 
ilar possible irrationality goes with Nash s equilibrium-point gener 
alization of the minimax solution of a matrix game. 

Combinatorial methods. In the last years of his life, which were 
filled by service to his country, von Neumann found little time to 
pursue his many ideas relative to the Theory of Games. A new 
theorem or computational method might lie for years in his files, or 
be communicated only in conversations with colleagues. A happy 
exception is provided by his paper on a matrix game equivalent to the 
personnel assignment problem [H], a paper that opened a whole new 
area of application of linear programming and game theory to com 
binatorial problems. This paper was produced by inviting von Neu 
mann to deliver his result to the Princeton seminar in game theory 
and then presenting him with notes taken by a member of the 
seminar to be edited for publication. The scheme worked, due to von 
Neumann s cheerful cooperation, and thus this influential paper 
appeared in print. 

The personnel assignment problem calls for the assignment of n 
men to n jobs, one man to each job, so as to make the sum of the 
rated values of the man-job pairings as large as possible. More spe 
cifically, given an n by n matrix R=(r i3 : ), where r,-y is the positive 
numerical rating of the ith man in the jth job, the problem is to find 
an wth order permutation matrix P = (p^) that will maximize 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 119 



This problem is classically trivial since it involves just a finite set of 
n\ possibilities. But in the modern age of automatic highspeed com 
puters it takes on real meaning; the aim is an algorithm that will be 
practical in terms of time and equipment available. 

Von Neumann suggested that the n\ possible permutation matrices 
P = (pij) be plotted as points X = (xij) in an w 2 -dimensional space. 
Then the problem becomes that of maximizing the linear form 

R(X) = Z * 
,y 

on the set of n\ points P. Extending this finite set of points to its 
convex hull makes no essential change in the maximization problem 
and translates a discrete situation into a continuous one, which be 
comes the following linear program: to maximize the linear form 
R(X) constrained by 

xtj ^ and ^ x v = * = 2 x a (* ./ = 1&gt; ,) 


Proceeding further, von Neumann proved that the minimax solu 
tion of the following game of Hide-and-Seek is equivalent to those 
of both the preceding problems: Player I "hides" in a cell (i, j) of 
an n by n square array. Player II "seeks" I either in a row i or a 
column/ If I is found, he must pay II the amount l/r#; otherwise 
the payoff is zero. 

While von Neumann viewed the paper as primarily a contribution 
to the computational solution of the assignment problem, by opening 
it to attack by methods devised for matrix games and linear pro 
grams, the influence of the paper far transcends this. Already several 
papers [16, Papers 10-14] have followed on, exploring the relations 
between linear programming and systems of distinct representa 
tives, making applications to other discrete problems, and finally 
unraveling the integral-solution properties peculiar to transportation 
problems (of which the assignment problem is but a special case). 

CONCLUSION 

The impact of von Neumann s Theory of Games extends far be 
yond the boundaries of this subject. By his example and through his 
accomplishments, he opened a broad new channel of two-way com 
munication between mathematics and the social sciences. These sci 
ences were fortunate indeed that one of the most creative mathe- 



120 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

maticians of the twentieth century concerned himself with some of 
their fundamental problems and constructed strikingly imaginative 
and stimulating models with which to attack their problems quantita 
tively. At the same time, mathematics received a vital infusion of 
fresh ideas and methods that will continue to be highly productive 
for many years to come. Von Neumann s interest in "problems of 
organized complexity," 4 so important in the social sciences, went hand 
in hand with his pioneering development of large-scale high-speed 
computers. There is a great challenge for other mathematicians to 
follow his lead in grappling with complex systems in many areas of 
the sciences where mathematics has not yet penetrated deeply. 

It was von Neumann s philosophy 5 that the mathematician may 
choose to work in any of a wide variety of fields, and that the selection 
of working material and the resulting measure of success are largely 
influenced by aesthetic values. However, he warned that mathe 
matics loses much of its creative drive when too far removed from 
empirical sources. This philosophy is exemplified in a most brilliant 
and enduring way by the Theory of Games. It is a tribute to his 
great genius that in his 1928 paper [A] he built such a sound and 
comprehensive mathematical foundation for games of strategy, an 
area almost new to mathematics, that he was able to see it explode 
in his lifetime into a broad and influential field of research. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY I 

JOHN VON NEUMANN S WORK 
IN THE THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 

A. Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele, Math. Ann. vol. 100 (1928) pp. 295-320. 

B. Uber ein okonomisches Gleichungs system und eine Verallgemeinerung des Brou- 
werschen Fixpunktsatzes , Ergeb. eines Math. Koll. Vienna (ed. by Karl Menger) 
vol. 8 (1937) pp. 73-83. 

C. A model of general economic equilibrium, Rev. Economic Studies vol. 13 
(1945-1946) pp. 1-9 (Translation of [B]). 

D. Theory of games and economic behavior (with Oskar Morgenstern) 1st ed., 
Princeton, 1944, 625 pp.; 2d ed., Princeton, 1947, 641 pp.; 3d ed., Princeton, 1953, 
641 pp. 

E. Discussion of a maximum problem (unpublished working paper, Princeton, 
November, 1947, 9 pp.). 

F. A numerical method for determination of the value and the best strategies of a zero- 



4 An apt designation of Warren Weaver, Science and complexity, Amer. Scientist 
vol. 36 (1948) pp. 536-544. 

5 See von Neumann s essay "The Mathematician" in The Works of the Mind 
Chicago 1947, pp. 180-196 [reprinted in The World of Mathematics (J. R. Newman, 
ed.) New York, 1956, pp. 2053-2063]. 



THEORY OF GAMES AND MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICS 121 

sum two-person game with large numbers of strategies, mimeographed, Princeton, May 
1948, 23 pp. 

G. Solutions of games by differential equations (with G. \V. Brown), Contributions 
to the Theory of Games, vol. I (ed. by H. \V. Kuhn and A. \V. Tucker) Ann. of Math. 
Studies, no. 24, Princeton, 1950, pp. 73-79. 

H. A certain zero-sum two-person game equivalent to the optimal assignment problem, 
Contributions to the Theory of Games, vol. II (ed. by H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker) 
Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 28, Princeton 1953, pp. 5-12. 

I. Two variants of poker (with D. B. Gillies and J. P. Mayberry), ibid. pp. 13-50. 

J. Communication on the Borel notes, Econometrica vol. 21 (1953) pp. 124-125. 

K. A numerical method to determine optimum strategy, Xav. Res. Logist. Quart, 
vol. 1 (1954) pp. 109-115. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY II 
OTHER REFERENCES 

1. K. J. Arrow, Alternative approaches to the theory of choice in risk-taking situations, 
Econometrica vol. 19 (1951) pp. 404-437; Utilities, attitudes, choices: A review note, 
ibid. vol. 26 (1958) pp. 1-23. 

2. C. Berge, Theorie generate des jeux a n personnes (Memor. Sci. Math., no. 138) 
Paris, 1957. 

3. E. Borel, La theorie du jeu et les equations integrates a noyau symetrique gauche, 
C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris vol. 173 (1921) pp. 1304-1308; Sur les jeux ou interviennent 
Vhasard et Vhabilete des joueurs, Theorie des Probabilite s, Paris, 1924, pp. 202-224; 
Sur les systemes de formes lineaires a determinant symetrique gauche et la theorie generate 
dujeu, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris vol. 184 (1927) pp. 52-54. [These three notes are re 
printed, in English translation by L. J. Savage, in Econometrica vol. 21 (1953) pp. 
97-117.] 

4. M. Dresher, A. \V. Tucker, and P. Wolfe (editors), Contributions to the Theory 
of Games, vol. Ill, Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 39, Princeton, 1957. 

5. M. Hausner, Multidimensional utilities, Decision processes (R. M. Thrall, 
C. H. Coombs, and R. L. Davis, editors) New York, 1954, pp. 167-180. 

6. I. X. Herstein and J. W. Milnor, An axiomatic approach to measurable utility , 
Econometrica vol. 21 (1953) pp. 291-297. 

7. S. Kakutani, A generalization of Brouwer s fixed point theorem, Duke Math. J. 
vol. 8 (1941) pp. 457-459. 

8. L. Kalmar, Zur Theorie der abstrakten Spiele, Acta Sci. Math. Szeged, vol. 4 
(1928-1929) pp. 65-85. 

9. J. G. Kemeny, O. Morgenstern and G. L. Thompson, A generalization of the von 
Neumann model of an expanding economy, Econometrica vol. 24 (1956) pp. 115-135. 

10. H. Kneser, Sur un theoreme fondamental de la theorie des jeux, C. R. Acad. 
Sci. Paris vol. 234 (1952) pp. 2418-2420. 

11. D. Konig, Uber eine Schlussweise aus dem Endlichen ins Unendtiche, Acta Sci. 
Math. Szeged, vol. 3 (1927) pp. 121-130. 

12. T. C. Koopmans (editor), Activity analysis of production and allocation, Cowles 
Commission Monograph, no. 13, Xew York, 1951. 

13. H. \V. Kuhn and A. \V. Tucker, Nonlinear programming, Proceedings of the 
Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability (J. Xey- 
man, ed.), Berkeley, 1951, pp. 481-492. 

14. H. \V. Kuhn and A. \V. Tucker (editors), Contributions to the theory of games, 
vol. I, Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 24, Princeton, 1950. 



122 H. W. KUHN AND A. W. TUCKER 

15. , Contributions to the theory of games, vol. II, Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 
28, Princeton, 1953. 

16. , Linear inequalities and related systems, Ann. of Math Studies, no. 38, 
Princeton, 1956. 

17. R. D. Luce and H. Raiffa, Games and decisions, New York, 1957. 

18. R. D. Luce and A. W. Tucker (editors), Contributions to the theory of games, 
vol. IV, Ann. of Math. Studies, no. 40, Princeton (in press). 

19. J. McDonald, Strategy in poker, business, and war, New York, 1950. 

20. J. F. Nash, Non-cooperative games, Ann. of Math. vol. 54 (1951) pp. 286-295. 

21. R. Otter and J. J. Dunne, Games with equilibrium points, Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. vol. 39 (1953) pp. 310-314. 

22. F. P. Ramsey, Truth and probability (1926), Further considerations (1928), 
Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays, London and New York, 1931. 

23. M. Richardson, On weakly ordered systems, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. vol. 52 
(1946) pp. 113-116; Extension theorems for solutions of ir reflexive relations, Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 39 (1953) pp. 649-655; Solutions of irreflexive relations, Ann. of 
Math. vol. 58 (1953) pp. 573-590; Relativization and extension of solutions of irreflex 
ive relations, Pacific J. Math. vol. 5 (1955) pp. 551-584. 

24. L. J. Savage, The foundations of statistics, New York, 1954. 

25. L. S. Shapley, Stochastic games, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 39 (1953) 
pp. 1095-1100. 

26. J. Ville, Sur la theorie generate des jeux ou intervient Vhabilete des joueurs, 
Traitd du Calcul des Probability s et de ses Applications (by fi. Borel and collabora 
tors) vol. IV, no. 2, Paris, 1938, pp. 105-113. 

27. A. Wald, Uber die eindeutige positive Losbarkeit der neuen Produktionsgleich- 
ungen, Ergeb. eines Math. Koll. Vienna (ed. by Karl Menger) vol. 6 (1935) pp. 12- 
20; Uber die Produktionsgleichungen der okonomischen Wertlehre, ibid. vol. 7 (1936) 
pp. 1-6; tfber einige Gleichungssysteme der mathematischen Okonomie, Z. National- 
okonomie vol. 7 (1936) pp. 637-670 [English translation in Econometrica vol. 19 
(1951) pp. 368-403]. 

28. , Generalization of a theorem by v. Neumann concerning zero sum two 

person games, Ann. of Math. vol. 46 (1945) pp. 281-286; Statistical decision functions 
which minimize the maximum risk, ibid. pp. 265-280; Statistical decision functions, 
New York, 1950. 

29. P. Wolfe, The strict determinateness of certain infinite games, Pacific J. Math, 
vol. 5 (1955) pp. 841-847. 

30. E. Zermelo, Uber eine Anwendung der Mengenlehre auf die Theorie des Schach- 
spiels, Proceedings of the Fifth International Congress of Mathematicians, Cam 
bridge, 1912, vol. 2, p. 501-504. 

BRYN MAWR COLLEGE AND 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS 
TO AUTOMATA THEORY 

CLAUDE E. SHANNON 

The theory of automata is a relatively recent and by no means 
sharply defined area of research. It is an interdisciplinary science 
bordered mathematically by symbolic logic and Turing machine 
theory, bordered engineering-wise by the theory and the use, par 
ticularly for general non-numerical work, of large scale computing 
machines, and bordered biologically by neurophysiology, the theory 
of nerve-nets and the like. Problems range from Godel-type questions 
(relating to Turing machines and decision procedures), to questions 
of duplication, of various biological phenomena in a machine (e.g., 
adaptation, self-reproduction and self-repair). 

Von Neumann spent a considerable part of the last few years of 
his life working in this area. It represented for him a synthesis of his 
early interest in logic and proof theory and his later work, during 
World War II and after, on large scale electronic computers. Involv 
ing a mixture of pure and applied mathematics as well as other 
sciences, automata theory was an ideal field for von Neumann s wide- 
ranging intellect. He brought to it many new insights and opened up 
at least two new directions of research. It is unfortunate that he was 
unable to complete the work he had in progress, some of which is in 
the form of rough notes or unedited lectures, and for some of which 
no record exists apart from his colleagues memories of casual con 
versations. 

We shall not here discuss his tremendously important contribu 
tions to computing machines and their use his ideas on their logical 
organization, [l; 3] the use of flow diagrams for programming, 
[3; 4; 5] methods of programming various problems such as the 
inversion of matrices, [2] the Monte Carlo method, and so on, 
but restrict ourselves to the automata area proper. 

Reliable machines and unreliable components. One important part 
of von Neumann s work on automata relates to the problem of de 
signing reliable machines using unreliable components [10]. Given 
a set of building blocks with some positive probability of malfunc 
tioning, can one by suitable design construct arbitrarily large and 
complex automata for which the overall probability of incorrect out 
put is kept under control? Is it possible to obtain a probability of 

Received by the editors February 10, 1958. 




124 C. E. SHANNON 

error as small as desired, or at least a probability of error not exceed 
ing some fixed value (independent of the particular automaton) ? 

We have, in human and animal brains, examples of very large and 
relatively reliable systems constructed from individual components, 
the neurons, which would appear to be anything but reliable, not 
only in individual operation but in fine details of interconnection. 
Furthermore, it is well known that under conditions of lesion, acci 
dent, disease and so on, the brain continues to function remarkably 
well even when large fractions of it are damaged. 

These facts are in sharp contrast with the behavior and organiza 
tion of present day computing machines. The individual components 
of these must be engineered to extreme reliability, each wire must be 
properly connected, and each order in a program must be correct. 
A single error in components, wiring or programming will typically 
lead to complete gibberish in the output. If we are to view the brain 
as a machine, it is evidently organized for protection against errors 
in a way quite different from computing machines. 

The problem is analogous to that in communication theory where 
one wishes to construct codes for transmission of information for 
which the reliability of the entire code is high even though the re 
liability for the transmission of individual symbols is poor. In com 
munication theory this can be done by properly introduced redun 
dancy, and some similar device must be used in the case at hand. 
Merely performing the same calculation many times and then taking 
a majority vote will not suffice. The majority vote would itself be 
taken by unreliable components and thus would have to be taken 
many times and majority votes taken of the majority votes. And so 
on. We are face to face with a "Who will watch the watchman" type 
of situation. 

To attack these problems, von Neumann first set up a formal struc 
ture for automata. The particular system he chooses is somewhat like 
the McCullough-Pitts model; networks made up of a number of 
interconnected components, each component of a relatively simple 
type. The individual components receive binary inputs over a set of 
different input lines and produce a binary output on an output line. 
The output occurs a certain integer number of time units later. If the 
output were a function of the inputs, we would have a reliable com 
ponent that might perform, for example, operations of "and," "not," 
"Sheffer stroke," etc. However, if the output is related only statisti 
cally to the input, if, for example, with probability 1 e it gives the 
Sheffer stroke function and with probability e the negative of this, 
we have an unreliable component. Given an unlimited number of 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS TO AUTOMATA THEORY 125 

such unreliable elements, say of the Sheffer stroke type, can one 
construct a reliable version of any given automaton? 

Von Neumann shows that this can be done, and in fact does this 
by two quite different schemes. The first of these is perhaps the more 
elegant mathematically, as it stays closely within the prescribed 
problem and comes face to face with the "watchman" problem. This 
solution involves the construction from three unreliable sub-networks, 
together with certain comparing devices, of a large and more reliable 
sub-network to perform the same function. By carrying this out sys 
tematically throughout some network for realizing an automaton 
with reliable elements, one obtains a network for the same behavior 
with unreliable elements. 

The first solution, as he points out, suffers from two shortcomings. 
In the first place, the final reliability cannot be made arbitrarily good 
but only held at a certain level e (the e depending on the reliability 
of the individual components). If the individual components are quite 
poor the solution, then, can hardly be considered satisfactory. Sec 
ondly, and even more serious from the point of view of application, 
the redundancy requirements for this solution are fantastically high 
in typical cases. The number of components required increases ex 
ponentially with the number n of components in the automaton being 
copied. Since n is very large in cases of practical interest, this solution 
can be considered to be only of logical importance. 

The second approach involves what von Neumann called the 
multiplex trick. This means representing a binary output in the 
machine not by one line but by a bundle of N lines, the binary 
variable being determined by whether nearly all or very few of the 
lines carry the binary value 1. An automaton design based on reliable 
components is, in this scheme, replaced by one where each line be 
comes a bundle of lines, and each component is replaced by a sub 
network which operates in the corresponding fashion between bun 
dles of input and output lines. Von Neumann shows how such sub 
networks can be constructed. He also makes some estimates of the 
redundancy requirements for certain gains in reliability. For exam 
ple, starting with an unreliable "majority" organ whose probability 
of error is 1/200, by a redundancy of 60,000 to 1 a sub-network repre 
senting a majority organ for bundles can be constructed whose proba 
bility of error is 10~ 20 . Using reasonable figures this would lead to an 
automaton of the complexity and speed of the brain operating for 
a hundred years with expectation about one error. In other words, 
something akin to this scheme is at least possible as the basis of the 
brain s reliability. 



126 C. E. SHANNON 

Self-reproducing machines. Another branch of automata theory 
developed by von Neumann is the study of self-reproducing ma 
chines is it possible to formulate a simple and abstract system of 
"machines" which are capable of constructing other identical ma 
chines, or even more strongly, capable of a kind of evolutionary proc 
ess in which successive generations construct machines of increasing 
"complexity." A real difficulty here is that of striking the proper bal 
ance between formal simplicity and ease of manipulation, on the 
one hand, and approximation of the model to real physical machines 
on the other hand. If reality is copied too closely in the model we 
have to deal with all of the complexity of nature, much of which is 
not particularly relevant to the self-reproducing question. However, 
by simplifying too much, the structure becomes so abstract and 
simplified that the problem is almost trivial and the solution is un 
impressive with regard to solving the philosophical point that is in 
volved. In one place, after a lengthy discussion of the difficulties of 
formulating the problem satisfactorily, von Neumann remarks: "I do 
not want to be seriously bothered with the objection that (a) every 
body knows that automata can reproduce themselves (b) everybody 
knows that they cannot." 

Von Neumann spent a good deal of time on the self-reproduction 
problem, discussing it briefly in the Hixon Symposium paper [s] and 
later in more detail in uncompleted manuscripts [12]. 

He actually considered two different formulations of the problem. 
In the Hixon Symposium paper and in earlier lectures on this subject, 
a model is discussed in which there are a small number of basic com 
ponents from which machines are made. These might be, for example, 
girders, a sensing organ (for sensing the presence of other parts), a 
joining organ (for fastening other parts together), etc. Machines are 
made by combinations of these parts and exist in a geometrical en 
vironment with other similar parts freely available. 

Certain machines, made from these parts, are capable of gathering 
and working with components from the environment. It is possible 
also to construct "programmed" machines which follow a long se 
quence of instructions much as a computer does. Here, however, the 
instructions relate to manipulating parts rather than carrying out 
long calculations. The situation is somewhat analogous to that of 
Turing machines and indeed there is a notion of a universal constriK t- 
ing machine which can, by proper programming, imitate any machine 
for construction purposes. Von Neumann indicates how such a uni 
versal machine, together with a program-duplicating part can be 
made into a self-reproducing machine. 

This model is a very interesting one but, involving as it does com- 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS TO AUTOMATA THEORY 127 

plex considerations of motion of parts in a real Euclidean space, it 
would be tremendously difficult to carry out in detail, even if one 
ignored problems of energy, noise in the environment, and the like. 
At any rate, von Neumann abandoned this model in his later work in 
favor of a simpler construction. 

The second type of self-reproducing system is described in an un 
finished book for the University of Illinois Press. This second model is 
perhaps a little more suggestive of biological reproduction in the small 
(say at the cellular or even molecular level) although it is not closely 
patterned after any real physical system. Consider an infinite array 
of squares in the Euclidean plane, each square or "cell" capable of 
being in any of a number of states. The model that von Neumann 
developed had cells with twenty-nine possible states. Time moves in 
discrete steps. The state of a cell at a given time is a function of its 
state at the preceding time and that of its four nearest neighbors at 
the preceding time. As time progresses, then, the states of all cells 
evolve and change according to these functional relations. A certain 
state of the cells is called "quiescent" and corresponds to an inactive 
part of the plane. By proper construction of the functional equations 
it is possible to have groups of neighboring "active" cells which act 
somewhat like a living entity, an entity capable of retaining its 
identity, moving about and even of reproduction in the sense of 
causing another group of cells to take on a similar active state. 

In addition to the self-reproducing question, he considers to some 
extent the problem of "evolution" in automata is it possible to 
design automata which will construct in successive generations auto 
mata in some sense more efficient in adapting to their environment. 
He points out the existence of a critical size of automaton built from 
a given type of component such that smaller automata can only 
construct automata smaller than themselves, while some automata 
of the critical size or larger are capable of self-reproduction or even 
evolution (given a suitable definition of efficiency). 

Comparison of computing machines with the brain. A field of great 
interest to von Neumann was that of the relation between the central 
nervous system and modern large-scale computers. His Hixon Sym 
posium paper relates to this theme as well as to the problem of self- 
reproducing machines. More particularly, the Silliman Memorial Lec 
tures [ll] (which he prepared but was unable to deliver) are largely 
concerned with this comparison. 

While realizing the similarities between computers and nerve-nets, 
von Neumann was also clearly aware of and often emphasized the 
many important differences. At the surface level there are obvious 
differences in order of magnitude of the number and size of com- 



128 C. E. SHANNON 

ponents and of their speed of operation. The neurons of a brain are 
much slower than artificial counterparts transistors or vacuum tubes, 
but on the other hand they are much smaller, dissipate less power 
and there are many orders of magnitude more of them than in the 
largest computers. At a deeper level of comparison von Neumann 
stresses the differences in logical organization that must exist in the 
two cases. In part, these differences are implied by the difference in 
the kind of problem involved, "the logical depth," or the number of 
elementary operations that must be done in sequence to arrive at a 
solution. With computers, this logical depth may reach numbers like 
10 7 or more because of the somewhat artificial and serial method of 
solving certain problems. The brain presumably, with more and 
slower components, operates on a more parallel basis with less logical 
depth and further, the problems it confronts are much less of the 
sequential calculation variety. 

In the Silliman lectures, von Neumann touches briefly on a curious 
and provocative idea with some relevance to the foundations of 
mathematics. Turing, in his well known paper on computability, 
pointed out how one computing machine could be made to imitate 
another. Orders for the second machine are translated by a "short 
code" into sequences of orders for the first machine which cause it to 
accomplish, in a generally roundabout way, what the first machine 
would do. With such a translating code the first machine can be 
made to look, for computing purposes, like the second machine, al 
though it is actually working inside in a different language. This pro 
cedure has become a commonplace and very useful tool in the every 
day use of computers. 

If we think of the brain as some kind of computing machine it is 
perfectly possible that the external language we use in communicat 
ing with each other may be quite different from the internal language 
used for computation (which includes, of course, all the logical and 
information-processing phenomena as well as arithmetic computa 
tion). In fact von Neumann gives various persuasive arguments that 
we are still totally unaware of the nature of the primary language for 
mental calculation. He states "Thus logics and mathematics in the 
central nervous system, when viewed as languages, must be struc 
turally essentially different from those languages to which our com 
mon experience refers. 

"It also ought to be noted that the language here involved may well 
correspond to a short code in the sense described earlier, rather than 
to a complete code: when we talk mathematics, we may be discussing 
a secondary language, built on the primary language truly used by 
the central nervous system. Thus the outward forms of our mathe- 



VON NEUMANN S CONTRIBUTIONS TO AUTOMATA THEORY 129 

matics are not absolutely relevant from the point of view of evaluat 
ing what the mathematical or logical language truly used by the cen 
tral nervous system is. However, the above remarks about reliability 
and logical and arithmetic depth prove that whatever the system is, 
it cannot fail to differ considerably from what we consciously and 
explicitly consider as mathematics." 

In summary, von Neumann s contributions to automata theory 
have been characterized, like his contributions to other branches of 
mathematics and science, by the discovery of entirely new fields of 
study and the penetrating application of modern mathematical tech 
niques. The areas which he opened for exploration will not be mapped 
in detail for many years. It is unfortunate that several of his projects 
in the automata area were left unfinished. 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Preliminary discussion of the logical design of an electronic computing instrument. 
Part I, Vol. I. With A. W. Burks and H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. 
Army Ord. Dept. under Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481 (June 28, 1946, 2d ed. Sept. 
2, 1947), 42 pp. 

2. Numerical inverting of matrices of high order. With H. H. Goldstine. Amer. 
Math. Soc. Bull. vol. 53 (1947) pp. 1021-1099. 

3. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument. Part II, 
Vol. I. With H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. Army Ord. Dept. under 
Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481, 1947, 69 pp. 

4. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument. Part 1 1 , 
Vol. II. With H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. Army Ord. Dept. under 
Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481, 1948, 68 pp. 

5. Planning and coding of problems for an electronic computing instrument. Part 
II, Vol. III. With H. H. Goldstine. Report prepared for U. S. Army Ord. Dept. under 
Contract W-36-034-ORD-7481, 1948, 23 pp. 

6. The future of high-speed computing. Proc., Comp. Sem., Dec. 1949, published 
and copyrighted by IBM, 1951, p. 13. 

7. Numerical inverting of matrices of high order, II. With H. H. Goldstine. Proc. 
Amer. Math Soc. vol. 2 (1951) pp. 188-202. 

8. The general and logical theory of automata. "Cerebral mechanisms in behavior 
The Hixon symposium," September 1948, Pasadena, edited by L. A. Jeffress, John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1951, pp. 1-31. 

9. Entwicklung und Ausnutzung neuerer mathematischer Maschinen. Arbeits- 
gemeinschaft fiir Forschung des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, Heft 45. Diisseldorf, 
September 15, 1954. 

10. Probabilistic logics and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable com 
ponents, "Automata studies," edited by C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, Princeton 
University Press, 1956, pp. 43-98. 

11. The Silliman Memorial Lectures. (In press). Yale University Press. To be 
published, 1958. 

12. Unfinished manuscript for the University of Illinois Press relating to the 
theory of automata and, particularly, self-reproducing machines. 

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 



