Foreword to the Third Edition, by Ray Kurzweil 


Foreword to the Second Edition, by Paul M. 
Churchland and Patricia $. Churchland 


Preface, by Klara von Neumann 


Introduction 


PART 1 THE COMPUTER 


The Analog Procedure 
The Conventional Basic Operations, 4 


Unusual Basic Operations, 4 


The Digital Procedure 
Markers, Their Combinations and Embodiments, 6 
Digital Machine Types and Their Basic Components, 7 
Parallel and Serial Schemes, 8 


The Conventional Basic Operations, 8 


xi 


XXXili 
xlv 


I 


CONTENTS 


Logical Control II 
Plugged Control, 12 
Logical Tape Control, 12 
The Principle of Only One Organ for Each Basic Operation, 13 
The Consequent Need for a Special Memory Organ, 14 
Control by “Control Sequence” Points, 14 
Memory-Stored Control, 17 
Modus Operandi of the Memory-Stored Control, 20 
Mixed Forms of Control, 21 


Mixed Numerical Procedures 22 
Mixed Representations of Numbers. 


Machines Built on This Basis, 23 


Precision 25 


Reasons for the High (Digital) Precision Requirements, 26 
Characteristics of Modern Analog Machines 29 


Characteristics of Modern Digital Machines 29 
Active Components; Questions of Speed, 30 
Number of Active Components Required, 31 
Memory Organs. Access Times and Memory Capacities, 32 
Memory Registers Built from Active Organs, 32 
The Hierarchic Principle for Memory Organs, 3.4 
Memory Components; Questions of Access, 35 
Complexities of the Concept of Access Time, 36 
The Principle of Direct Addressing, 37 


viii 


CONTENTS 


PART 2 THE BRAIN 39 
Simplified Description of the Function of the Neuron 40 


The Nature of the Nerve Impulse 40 
The Process of Stimulation, 42 
The Mechanism of Stimulating Pulses by Pulses; Its Digital 
Character, 43 
Time Characteristics of Nerve Response, Fatigue, and Recovery, 45 
Size of a Neuron. Comparisons with Artificial Components, 47 
Energy Dissipation. Comparisons with Artificial Components, 49 


Summary of Comparisons, 50 


Stimulation Criteria 52 
The Simplest—Elementary Logical, 52 
More Complicated Stimulation Criteria, 54 
The Threshold, 55 
The Summation Time, 56 


Stimulation Criteria for Receptors, 57 


The Problem of Memory within the Nervous System 61 
Principles for Estimating the Capacity of the Memory in 
the Nervous System, 62 
Memory Capacity Estimates with These Stipulations, 63 
Various Possible Physical Embodiments of the Memory, 65 
Analogies with Artificial Computing Machines, 66 
The Underlying Componentry of the Memory Need Not Be 
the Same as That of the Basic Active Organs, 67 


CONTENTS 


Digital and Analog Parts in the Nervous System 69 
Role of the Genetic Mechanism in the Above Context, 70 


Codes and Their Role in the Control of the Functioning 
of a Machine 70 
The Concept of a Complete Code, 71 
The Concept of a Short Code, 72 
The Function of a Short Code, 73 


The Logical Structure of the Nervous System 74 
Importance of the Numerical Procedures, 75 
Interaction of Numerical Procedures with Logic, 75 


Reasons for Expecting High Precision Requirements, 76 


Nature of the System of Notations Employed: 
Not Digital but Statistical 77 
Arithmetical Deterioration. Roles of Arithmetical and 
Logical Depths, 79 
Arithmetical Precision or Logical Reliability, Alternatives, 80 
Other Statistical Traits of the Message System 
That Could Be Used, 81 


The Language of the Brain Not the Language 
of Mathematics 81 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


Information technologies have already transformed every 
facet of human life from business and politics to the arts. 
Given the inherent exponential increase in the price- 
performance and capacity of every form of information 
technology, the information age is continually expanding 
its sphere of influence. Arguably the most important infor- 
mation process to understand is human intelligence itself, 
and this book is perhaps the earliest serious examination of 
the relationship between our thinking and the computer, 
from the mathematician who formulated the fundamental 
architecture of the computer era. 

In a grand project to understand the human brain, we are 
making accelerating gains in reverse engineering the para- 
digms of human thinking, and are applying these biolog- 
ically inspired methods to create increasingly intelligent 
machines. Artificial intelligence (AI) devised in this way will 
ultimately soar past unenhanced human thinking. My view 


is that the purpose of this endeavor is not to displace us but to 


xi 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


expand the reach of what is already a human-machine civili- 
zation. This is what makes our species unique. 

So what are the key ideas that underlie this information 
age? By my count there are five. John von Neumann is 
largely responsible for three of them, and he made a funda- 
mental contribution to a fourth. Claude Shannon solved the 
fundamental problem of making information reliable. Alan 
Turing demonstrated and defined the universality of com- 
putation and was influenced by an early lecture by von 
Neumann. Building on Turing and Shannon, von Neumann 
created the von Neumann machine, which became—and 
remains—the fundamental architecture for computation. 

In the deceptively modest volume you are now holding, 
von Neumann articulates his model of computation and 
goes on to define the essential equivalence of the human 
brain and a computer. He acknowledges the apparently 
deep structural differences, but by applying Turing’s princi- 
ple of the equivalence of all computation, von Neumann 
envisions a strategy to understand the brain’s methods as 
computation, to re-create those methods, and ultimately to 
expand its powers. The book is all the more prescient given 
that it was written more than half a century ago when 
neuroscience had only the most primitive tools available. 
Finally, von Neumann anticipates the essential acceleration 
of technology and its inevitable consequences in a coming 
singular transformation of human existence. Let’s consider 


these five basic ideas in slightly more detail. 


xii 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


Around 1940, if you used the word “computer,” people 
assumed you were talking about an analog computer. Num- 
bers were represented by different levels of voltage, and 
specialized components could perform arithmetic func- 
tions such as addition and multiplication. A big limitation, 
however, was that analog computers were plagued by ac- 
curacy issues. Numbers could be represented with an ac- 
curacy of only about one part in a hundred, and because 
voltage levels representing numbers were processed by in- 
creasing numbers of arithmetic operators, these errors 
would accumulate. If you wanted to perform more than a 
handful of computations, the results would become so in- 
accurate as to be meaningless. 

Anyone who can remember the days of copying music 
using analog tape will remember this effect. There was no- 
ticeable degradation on the first copy, for it was a little 
noisier than the original (“noise” represents random inac- 
curacies). A copy of the copy was noisier still, and by the 
tenth generation, the copy was almost entirely noise. 

It was assumed that the same problem would plague the 
emerging world of digital computers. We can see this per- 
ceived problem if we consider the communication of digi- 
tal information through a channel. No channel is perfect 
and will have some inherent error rate. Suppose we have a 
channel that has a 0.9 probability of correctly transmitting 
each bit of information. If I send a message that is one-bit 


long, the probability of accurately transmitting it through 


xiii 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


that channel will be o.9. Suppose I send two bits? Now the 
accuracy is 0.9” = 0.81. How about if I send one byte (eight 
bits)? I have less than an even chance (0.43, to be exact) of 
sending it correctly. The probability of accurately sending 
five bytes is about 1 percent. 

An obvious approach to circumvent this problem is to 
make the channel more accurate. Suppose the channel 
makes only one error in a million bits. If 1 send a file with a 
half million bytes (about the size of a modest program or 
database), the probability of correctly transmitting it is less 
than 2 percent, despite the very high inherent accuracy of 
the channel. Given that a single-bit error can completely 
invalidate a computer program and other forms of digital 
data, that is not a satisfactory situation. Regardless of the 
accuracy of the channel, since the likelihood of an error in a 
transmission grows rapidly with the size of the message, 
this would seem to be an intractable problem. 

Analog computers approach this problem through grace- 
ful degradation. They also accumulate inaccuracies with 
increased use, but if we limit ourselves to a constrained set 
of calculations, they prove somewhat useful. Digital com- 
puters, on the other hand, require continual communica- 
tion, not just from one computer to another, but within the 
computer itself: There is communication between its mem- 
ory and the central processing unit. Within the central pro- 
cessing unit, there is communication from one register to 


another, and back and forth to the arithmetic unit, and so 


xiv 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


on. Even within the arithmetic unit, there is communica- 
tion from one bit register to another. Communication is 
pervasive at every level. If we consider that error rates es- 
calate rapidly with increased communication and that a 
single-bit error can destroy the integrity of a process, digital 
computation is doomed—or so it seemed at the time. 

Remarkably, that was the common view until Shannon 
came along with the first key idea of the information age. 
He demonstrated how we can create arbitrarily accurate 
communication using the most unreliable communication 
channels. What Shannon said in his now landmark paper, 
“A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” published in 
the Bell System Technical Journal in July and October 1948, and 
in particular in his noisy-channel coding theorem, was that 
if you have available a channel with any error rate (except 
for exactly 50 percent per bit, which would mean that 
channel is transmitting pure noise), you are able to transmit 
a message and make the error rate as accurate as you want. 
In other words, the error rate can be one bit out of n bits, 
where n can be as large as you want. So, for example, in the 
extreme, if you have a channel that transmits bits of infor- 
mation correctly only 51 percent of the time (that is, it 
transmits the correct bit just slightly more often than the 
wrong bit), you can nonetheless transmit messages such 
that only one bit out ofa million is incorrect, or one bit out 
of a trillion or a trillion trillion. 


How is this possible? The answer is through redundancy. 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


That may seem obvious now, but it was not obvious at the 
time. As a simple example, if1 transmit each bit three times 
and take the majority vote, I will have substantially increased 
the reliability of the result. If that is not good enough, 
increase the redundancy until you get the reliability you 
need. The idea of simply repeating information is the easiest 
way to see how we can achieve arbitrarily high accuracy rates 
from low-accuracy channels, but this approach is not the 
most efficient approach. Shannon’s paper established the 
field of information theory and presented optimal methods 
of error detection and correction codes that can achieve any 
target accuracy through any nonrandom channel. 

Older readers will recall telephone modems that trans- 
mitted information through noisy analog phone lines, 
which included audible hisses and pops and many other 
forms of distortion, but nonetheless were able to transmit 
digital data with very high accuracy rates, thanks to Shan- 
non’s noisy-channel theorem. 

The same issue and the same solution exist for digital 
memory. Ever wonder how CDs, DVDs, and program disks 
continue to provide reliable results even after the disk has 
been dropped on the floor and scratched? Again, we can 
thank Shannon. Computation consists of three elements: 
communication (which, as I mentioned, is pervasive both 
within and between computers), memory, and logic gates 
(which perform the arithmetic and logical functions). The 


accuracy of logic gates can also be made arbitrarily high by 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


similarly using error detection and correction codes. It is 
due to Shannon’s theorem that we can handle arbitrarily 
large and complex digital data and algorithms without the 
processes being disturbed or destroyed by errors. 

The second important idea on which the information age 
relies is the universality of computation. In 1936 Alan Turing 
described his “Turing machine,” which is not an actual 
machine but a thought experiment. His theoretical com- 
puter consists ofan infinitely long memory tape witha 1 ora 
o in each square. Input to the machine is presented on this 
tape. The machine reads the tape one square at a time. The 
machine also contains a table of rules, essentially a stored 
program. The rules consist of numbered states. Each rule 
specifies one action if the square currently being read is a o 
and a different action if the current square is a 1. Possible ac- 
tions include writing a o ora 1 on the tape, moving the tape 
one square to the right or the left, or halting. Each state then 
specifies the number of the next state that the machine 
should be in. When the machine halts, it has completed its 
algorithm, and the output of the process is left on the tape. 
Even though the tape is theoretically infinite in length, any ac- 
tual program (that does not get into an infinite loop) uses only 
a finite portion of the tape, so if we limit ourselves to a finite 
memory, the machine still solves a useful set of problems. 

If the Turing machine sounds simple, that was Turing’s 
objective. He wanted his Turing machine to be as simple as 


possible (but no simpler, to paraphrase Einstein). Turing 


xvii 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


and Alonzo Church, his former professor, went on to de- 
velop the Church-Turing thesis, which states that if a prob- 
lem that can be presented to a Turing machine is not solv- 
able by a Turing machine, it is also not solvable by any 
machine, following natural law. Even though the Turing 
machine has only a handful of commands and processes 
only one bit at a time, it can compute anything that any 
computer can compute. 

“Strong” interpretations of the Church-Turing thesis pro- 
pose an essential equivalence between what a human can 
think or know and what is computable by a machine. The 
basic idea is that the human brain is subject to natural law, 
and thus its information-processing ability cannot exceed 
that of a machine (and therefore of a Turing machine). 

We can properly credit Turing with establishing the theo- 
retical foundation of computation with his 19 36 paper, but 
it is important to note that Turing was deeply influenced by 
a lecture that John von Neumann gave in Cambridge, En- 
gland, in 1935 on his stored-program concept, a concept 
enshrined in the Turing machine. In turn, von Neumann 
was influenced by Turing’s 1936 paper, which elegantly laid 
out the principles of computation, and he made it required 
reading for his colleagues in the late 1930s and early 1940s. 

In the same paper, Turing reports another unexpected dis- 
covery, that of unsolvable problems. These are problems that 
are well defined and have unique answers that can be shown 


to exist but that we can also prove can never be computed by 


xviii 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


a Turing machine—that is to say, by any machine—which isa 
reversal of what had been a nineteenth-century confidence 
that problems that could be defined would ultimately be 
solved. Turing showed that there are as many unsolvable 
problems as solvable ones. Kurt Gddel reached a similar 
conclusion in his 1931 “Incompleteness Theorem.” We are 
thus left with the perplexing situation of being able to define 
a problem, to prove that a unique answer exists, and yet to 
know that the answer can never be discovered. 

A lot more can be said about the philosophical implica- 
tions of the work of Turing, Church, and Gédel, but for the 
purposes of this foreword, it is sufficient to say that Turing 
showed that computation is essentially based on a very sim- 
ple mechanism. Because the Turing machine (and, there- 
fore, any computer) is capable of basing its future course of 
action on results it has already computed, it is capable of 
making decisions and modeling arbitrarily complex hier- 
archies of information. 

Turing designed and completed what is arguably the first 
computer, called the Colossus, by December 1943 to de- 
code messages that had been encrypted by the Nazi Enigma 
coding machine. It was designed for one task and could not 
be reprogrammed for a different task. But it performed this 
one task brilliantly and is credited with enabling the Allies 
to overcome the 3:1 advantage that the German Luftwaffe 
enjoyed over the British Royal Air Force, enabling the Allies 


to win the crucial Battle of Britain. 


xix 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


It was on these foundations that John von Neumann cre- 
ated the architecture of the modern computer, the von Neu- 
mann machine, which has remained the core structure of 
essentially every computer for the past sixty-six years, from 
the microcontroller in your washing machine to the largest 
supercomputers. This is the third key idea of the informa- 
tion age. In a paper dated June Zo, 1945, titled “First Draft 
of a Report on the EDVAC,” von Neumann presented the 
concepts that have dominated computation ever since. The 
von Neumann model includes a central processing unit 
where arithmetical and logical operations are carried out, a 
memory unit where the program and data are stored, mass 
storage, a program counter, and input/output channels. 
This conception is described in the first half of this book. 
Although von Neumann's paper was intended as an internal 
project document, it became the Bible for computer de- 
signers in the 1940s and 190s and, indeed, has influenced 
the building of every computer since that time. 

The Turing machine was not designed to be practical. 
Turing’s theorems were not concerned with the efficiency of 
solving problems but rather with examining the range of 
problems that could be solved by computation. Von Neu- 
mann’s goal was to create a practical concept of a computa- 
tional machine. His concept replaces Turing’s one-bit com- 
putations with multiple-bit words (generally some multiple 
of eight bits). Turing’s memory tape is sequential, so Turing 


machine programs spend an inordinate amount of time 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


moving the tape back and forth to store and retrieve inter- 
mediate results. In contrast, von Neumann’s machine has a 
random access memory, so any data item can be immedi- 
ately retrieved. 

One of von Neumann’s key concepts is the stored pro- 
gram, which he had introduced a decade earlier: the pro- 
gram is stored in the same type of random access memory 
as the data (and often in the same block of memory). This 
allows the computer to be reprogrammed for different 
tasks. It even allows for self-modifying code (if the program 
store is writable), which allows for a powerful form of 
recursion. Up until that time, virtually all computers, in- 
cluding Turing’s own Colossus, were built for a specific 
task. The stored program allows a computer to be truly 
universal, thereby fulfilling Turing’s vision of the univer- 
sality of computation. 

Another of von Neumann’s key concepts is for each in- 
struction to include an operation code specifying the arith- 
metic or logical operation to be performed and the address 
of an operand from memory. Von Neumann’s formulation 
was introduced with his publication of the design of the 
EDVAC, a project he conducted with collaborators J. Presper 
Eckert and John Mauchly. The EDVAC itself did not actually 
run until 1951, by which time there were other stored- 
program computers, such as the Manchester Small-Scale 
Experimental Machine, ENIAC, EDSAC, and BINAC, all of 


which had been deeply influenced by von Neumann’s pa- 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


per and involved Eckert and Mauchly as designers. Von 
Neumann was a direct contributor to the design of a num- 
ber of these machines, including a later version of ENIAC 
which supported a stored program. 

There were a few precursors to von Neumann’s architec- 
ture, although none were true von Neumann machines, 
with one surprising exception. Howard Aiken’s Mark I, built 
in 1944, had an element of programmability but did not use 
a stored program. It read instructions from a punched paper 
tape and then executed each command immediately. There 
was no conditional branch instruction, so it cannot be con- 
sidered to be an example of von Neumann architecture. 

Predating the Mark I was the creation of the Z-3 com- 
puter in 1941 by Konrad Zuse. It also read its program from 
a tape (in this case, coded on film) and also lacked a condi- 
tional branch instruction. Interestingly, Zuse had support 
from the German Aircraft Research Institute which used the 
Z-3 to study wing flutter, but his proposal to the Nazi gov- 
ernment for funding to replace his relays with vacuum 
tubes was turned down. The Nazis deemed computation as 
“not war important.” 

The one true precursor to von Neumann’s concept came 
a full century earlier. Charles Babbage’s Analytical Engine, 
which he first described in 1837, incorporated the idea ofa 
stored program, which it provided via punched cards bor- 
rowed from the Jacquard loom. Its random access memory 


included one thousand words of 50 decimal digits each 


xxii 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


(the equivalent of about 21 kilobytes). Each instruction in- 
cluded an operation code and an operand number, just like 
modern machine languages. It also included conditional 
branching and looping, so it was a true von Neumann 
machine. It appears that the Analytical Engine was beyond 
Babbage’s mechanical and organizational skills, and it never 
ran. It is unclear whether the twentieth-century pioneers of 
the computer, including von Neumann, were aware of Bab- 
bage’s work. 

Despite never running, Babbage’s computer resulted in 
the creation of the field of software programming. Ada 
Byron, Countess of Lovelace and the only legitimate child of 
the poet Lord Byron, wrote programs for the Analytical 
Engine that she needed to debug in her own mind, a practice 
well known to software engineers today as “table checking.” 
She translated an article by the Italian mathematician Luigi 
Menabrea on the Analytical Engine and added extensive 
notes of her own. She wrote that “the Analytical Engine 
weaves algebraic patterns, just as the Jacquard loom weaves 
flowers and leaves.” She went on to provide perhaps the first 
speculations on the feasibility of artificial intelligence, but 
concluded that the Analytical Engine had “no pretensions 
whatever to originate anything.” 

Babbage’s conception is quite miraculous when you con- 
sider the era in which he lived and worked. However, by the 
mid-twentieth century, his work had been lost in the mists 


of time. It was von Neumann who conceptualized and ar- 


Xxill 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


ticulated the key principles of the computer as we know it 
today, and the world recognizes this by continuing to refer 
to the von Neumann machine as the principal model of 
computation. 

Keep in mind that the von Neumann machine continu- 
ally communicates data between and within its various 
units, so it would not be possible to build one if it were not 
for Shannon’s theorems and the methods he devised for 
transmitting and storing reliable digital information. 

That brings us to the fourth important idea, which is to 
find ways to endow computers with intelligence, to go 
beyond Ada Byron’s conclusion that a computer cannot 
think creatively. Alan Turing had already introduced this 
goal with his 1950 paper, “Computing Machinery and In- 
telligence,” which includes his now famous “Turing test” 
for ascertaining whether or not an AI has achieved a human 
level of intelligence. In this book, after introducing von 
Neumann architecture, von Neumann looks to the human 
brain itself. The human brain is, after all, the best example 
we have of an intelligent system. If we can learn its meth- 
ods, we can use these biologically inspired paradigms to 
build more intelligent machines. This book is the earliest 
serious examination of the human brain from the perspec- 
tive of a mathematician and computer pioneer. Prior to von 
Neumann, the fields of computer science and neuroscience 
were two islands with no bridge between them. 


It is ironic that the last work of one of the most brilliant 


Xxiv 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


mathematicians of the twentieth century and one of the pio- 
neers of the computer age was an examination of intelli- 
gence itself. The work was intended as a series of lectures for 
Yale University, but because of the ravages of cancer, von 
Neumann never delivered the lectures and did not complete 
the manuscript from which the lectures were to be given. It 
nonetheless remains a brilliant and prophetic foreshadow- 
ing of what I regard as humanity’s most daunting and im- 
portant project. 

Von Neumann starts by articulating the differences and 
similarities between the computer and the human brain. 
Given that he wrote in 1955 and 1956, the manuscript is 
remarkably accurate, especially in the details that are perti- 
nent to the comparison. He notes that the output of neu- 
rons is digital: an axon either fires or it doesn’t. This was far 
from obvious at the time, in that the output could have been 
an analog signal. The processing in the dendrites leading 
into a neuron and in the soma neuron cell body, however, 
are analog. He describes these calculations as a weighted 
sum of inputs with a threshold. This model of how neurons 
work led to the field of connectionism, in which systems 
are built based on this neuron model in both hardware and 
software. The first such connectionist system was created by 
Frank Rosenblatt as a software program on an IBM 704 
computer at Cornell in 1957. 

We now have more sophisticated models of how neurons 


combine inputs, but the essential idea of analog processing 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


of dendrite inputs using neurotransmitter concentrations 
has held up. We would not have expected von Neumann to 
get all of the details of how neurons process information 
correct in 1956, but the key points on which he bases his 
arguments remain valid. 

Von Neumann applies the concept of the universality of 
computation to conclude that even though the architecture 
and building blocks of the brain and the computer appear to 
be radically different, we can nonetheless conclude that a von 
Neumann machine can simulate a brain’s processing. The 
converse does not hold, however, because the brain is not a 
von Neumann machine and does not havea stored program as 
such. Its algorithm, or methods, are implicit in its structure. 

Von Neumann correctly concludes that neurons can learn 
patterns from their inputs, which we now know are coded 
in neurotransmitter concentrations. What was not known 
in von Neumann’s time is that learning also takes place 
through the creation and destruction of connections be- 
tween neurons. 

Von Neumann notes that the speed of neural processing 
is extremely slow, on the order of a hundred calculations 
per second, but that the brain compensates for this through 
massive parallel processing. Each one of its 10'° neurons is 
processing simultaneously (this number is also reasonably 
accurate; estimates today are between 10!° and 1o!!). In 
fact, each of the connections (with an average of about 10° 


connections per neuron) is computing simultaneously. 


xxvl 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


His estimates and description of neural processing are 
remarkable, given the primitive state of neuroscience at the 
time. One description that I disagree with is von Neumann's 
estimate of the brain’s memory capacity. He assumes that 
the brain remembers every input for an entire lifetime. Sixty 
years is about 2 x 10° seconds. With about fourteen inputs 
to each neuron per second (which is actually low by at least 
three orders of magnitude), and with 10!° neurons, he gets 
an estimate of about 107° bits for the brain’s memory capac- 
ity. The reality is that we remember only a very small frac- 
tion of our thoughts and experiences, and these memories 
are not stored as bit patterns at a low level (such as a video 
image), but rather as sequences of higher-level patterns. 
Our cortex is organized as a hierarchy of pattern recog- 
nizers. Some of these recognizers will recognize certain 
topological forms, such as the cross bar in a capital “A” or 
its lower concavity. These low-level recognizers in the neo- 
cortex feed those recognitions to pattern recognizers at a 
higher level. At that next level, recognizers may recognize 
specific printed letters such as the letter “A.” At an even 
higher level, words may be recognized, such as the word 
“Apple.” In another portion of the cortex, a recognizer at a 
comparable level may recognize the object, an apple; and in 
yet another portion, a recognizer may recognize the spoken 
word, “apple.” At a much higher conceptual level, a recog- 
nizer may conclude, “That was funny.” Our memory of 


events and thoughts is coded in terms of these higher-level 


Xxvil 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


recognitions. If we recall a memory of an experience, there 
is nothing equivalent to a video playing in our head. Rather, 
we recall a sequence of these high-level patterns. We have to 
reimagine the experience, for the details are not explicitly 
remembered. 

You can demonstrate this to yourself by trying to recall a 
recent experience—for example, the last time you took a 
walk. How much of that experience do you remember? 
Who was the fifth person you encountered? Did you see a 
baby carriage? A mailbox? What did you see when you 
turned the first corner? If you passed some stores, what was 
in the second window? Perhaps you can reconstruct the 
answers to these questions from the few cues that you re- 
member, but most of us do not have perfect recall of our 
experiences. Machines can, in fact, recall easily, and that is 
one advantage of artificial intelligence. 

There are very few discussions in this book that I find to be 
at significant odds with what we now understand. We are not 
in a position today to describe the brain perfectly, so we would 
not expect a book from 1956 on reverse engineering the brain 
to do so. That being said, von Neumann’s descriptions are 
remarkably up to date, and the details on which he bases his 
conclusions remain valid. As he describes each mechanism in 
the brain, he shows how a modern computer could accom- 
plish the same operation, despite the apparent differences. 
The brain’s analog mechanisms can be simulated through 


digital ones because digital computation can emulate analog 


Xxviii 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


values to any desired degree of precision (and the precision of 
analog information in the brain is quite low). 

The brain’s massive parallelism can also be simulated, 
given the significant speed advantage of computers in serial 
computation (an advantage that has vastly expanded since 
the book was written). In addition, we can also use parallel 
processing in computers by using parallel von Neumann 
machines. That is exactly how supercomputers work today. 

Considering how quickly we are able to make decisions 
and how very slowly neurons compute, he concludes that 
the brain’s methods cannot involve lengthy sequential al- 
gorithms. When a baseball fielder on third base decides to 
throw to first rather than to second base, he makes this 
decision in a fraction of a second. There is time for each 
neuron to go through only a handful of cycles (the period 
of time necessary for neural circuits to consider new in- 
puts). Von Neumann correctly concludes that the brain’s 
remarkable powers come from the ten billion neurons be- 
ing able to process information all at the same time. Recent 
advances in reverse engineering the visual cortex have con- 
firmed that we make sophisticated visual judgments in only 
three or four neural cycles. 

There is considerable plasticity in the brain, which en- 
ables us to learn. But there is far greater plasticity in a 
computer, which can completely restructure its methods by 
changing its software. Thus a computer will be able to 


emulate the brain, but the converse is not the case. 


Xxix 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


When von Neumann compared the capacity of the brain’s 
massively parallel organization to the (few) computers of his 
time, it was clear that the brain had far greater capacity than 
computers circa 1956. Today the first supercomputers are 
being built that achieve a speed matching some of the more 
conservative estimates of the speed required to functionally 
simulate the human brain (about 10!° operations per sec- 
ond). I estimate that the hardware for this level of computa- 
tion will cost $1,000 early in the 2020s. Even though it was 
remarkably early in the history of the computer when this 
manuscript was written, von Neumann nonetheless had 
confidence that both the hardware and the software of hu- 
man intelligence would ultimately be available. That was the 
reason he prepared these lectures. 

Von Neumann was deeply aware of the accelerating pace 
of progress and the profound implications of this progres- 
sion for humanity’s future, which brings us to the fifth key 
idea of the information age. A year after von Neumann’s 
death in 1957, fellow mathematician Stan Ulam quoted von 
Neumann as having said that “the ever accelerating progress 
of technology and changes in the mode of human life give 
the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in 
the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we 
know them, could not continue.” This is the first known use 
of the word “singularity” in the context of human history. 


Ray Kurzweil 


FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 


Further Readings 


Bochner, S. (1958). A Biographical Memoir of John von Neumann. Wash- 
ington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences. 

Turing, A. M. (1936). “On Computable Numbers, with an Ap- 
plication to the Entscheidungsproblem.” Proceedings of the London 
Mathematical Society 42: 230-65. doi:10.1112/plms/s2—42.1 
1230. 

Turing, A. M. (1938). “On Computable Numbers, with an Ap- 
plication to the Entscheidungsproblem: A Correction.” Proceed- 
ings of the London Mathematical Society 43: 544-46. doi:10.1112/ 
plms/s2—43.6.544. 

Turing, A. M. (October 1950). “Computing Machinery and Intel- 
ligence.” Mind 59 (236): 433-60. 

Ulam, S. (May 1958). “Tribute to John von Neumann.” Bulletin of 
the American Mathematical Society 64 (3, part 2): 1-49. 

von Neumann, John. (June 30, 1945). “First Draft of a Report on 
the EDVAC.” Moore School of Electrical Engineering, University 
of Pennsylvania. 

von Neumann, John. (July and October 1948). “A Mathematical 


Theory of Communication.” Bell System Technical Journal 27. 


XXXxi 


This page intentionally left blank 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


This innocent-looking little book lies at the eye of a hur- 
ricane. It represents a locus of clarity and calm at the center 
of a vast vortex of powerful arguments and competing re- 
search programs. And it is all the more singular for having 
been written in 1956, at the very beginning of the recent 
explosion in electronic computer technology, an explosion 
that will forever define the second half of the twentieth 
century. What John von Neumann attempted to provide in 
his final lecture series—here published as a single book— 
was a balanced assessment of the brain’s possible computa- 
tional activities, seen through the lens of modern computa- 
tional theory and in the light of computer technology and 
empirical neuroscience as they existed in that period. 

One might expect that any such assessment, made at that 
time, must now be hopelessly dated. But in fact the opposite 
is true. On the side of pure computational theory (the the- 
ory of generating the elements of any computable func- 
tion), the foundations laid by William Church, Alan Tur- 


ing, and, to a degree, von Neumann himself have proved 


XXxili 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


as sturdy and as fertile as any of them could have hoped. 
That lens was well turned at the start, and it still provides a 
sharp focus on a wide range of problems. 

On the side of computer technology, the turn-of-the- 
millennium machines that now grace every office and half 
the homes in America are all instances of what has come to 
be called the “von Neumann architecture.” They are all 
examples of a functional organization developed and ex- 
plored primarily by von Neumann, an organization that uses 
a sequential “program” held in the machine’s modifiable 
“memory” to dictate the nature and the order of the basic 
computational steps carried out by the machine’s “central 
processor.” The original rationale for that organization is 
here briskly and lucidly outlined in von Neumann’s own 
words, although he speaks of “code” where we now speak of 
“programs,” and he speaks of “complete codes” versus 
“short codes” where we now speak of “machine-language 
programs” versus “high-level programming languages.” But 
only the words, and the clock-speeds of the machines, have 
changed. John von Neumann would recognize every ma- 
chine currently in sight—from PalmPilot organizers to su- 
percomputers, whether running poker games or galactic- 
genesis simulations—as a further instance of his original 
architectural vision. He has in no relevant sense been left 
behind by our many advances in computer technology. 

On the side of empirical neuroscience, the situation is 


rather more complicated but even more interesting. To begin 


XXxiV 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


with, the several neurosciences (neuroanatomy, neurophys- 
iology, developmental neurobiology, and cognitive neuro- 
biology) have all made monumental advances themselves. 
Here, too, a half-century’s painstaking research has produced 
a substantially new science. Thanks to many recent experi- 
mental techniques (such as electron and confocal microscopy, 
patch clamping, electro- and magneto-encephalography, 
CAT scans, PET scans, and MRI scans), we now have a much 
better picture of the brain’s filamentary microstructure, the 
electrochemical behavior of its microscopic parts, and its 
global activities during various forms of conscious cogni- 
tion. Though still the home of many mysteries, the brain is 
no longer the “black box” it used to be. 

Curiously, however, these two kindred sciences—one fo- 
cused on artificial cognitive processes and the other on natural 
cognitive processes—pursued their parallel concerns in sub- 
stantial isolation from each other, from the 1950s right 
through to the present. The people who earned advanced 
degrees in computer science typically learned little or (more 
often) nothing about the biological brain, and their research 
activities were typically focused on writing programs, de- 
veloping new languages, or developing and producing ever- 
better microchip hardwares, none of which brought them 
into contact with the empirical neurosciences. Equally, the 
people who earned advanced degrees in neuroscience typ- 
ically learned little or nothing about computational theory, 


automata theory, formal logic and binary arithmetic, or the 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


electronics of transistors. More likely, they spent their re- 
search time staining slices of brain tissue for microscopic 
examination or putting microelectrodes into living neurons 
to record their electrical behaviors during various cognitive 
tasks. If they did use a computer and learn a programming 
language—as many did—they used it only as a tool to direct 
and collate their experimental activities, as one might use a 
voltmeter, a calculator, or a filing cabinet. 

The truth, it now seems, is that, while each of these two 
sciences has a great deal to learn about its own domain, and 
each was indeed a roaring success, neither science had much 
to teach the other about the other’s own domain. Despite the 
presumptive overlap—they shared a concern with cognitive 
or computational processes, after all—they flowed in parallel 
streams and each made its remarkable progress with little or 
no input from the sister science. But why? 

A persistently recurring answer is that the biological 
brain has a physical organization and uses a computational 
strategy that is very different from the von Neumann archi- 
tecture used in standard computing machines. For close to 
fifty years, the two sister sciences have in fact been focused 
on importantly different subject matters. In retrospect, it is 
no wonder that they developed in substantial independence 
of one another. 

This answer is still fiercely disputed, and it may, indeed, 
be mistaken. But it lies at the heart of current discussions 


about how the biological brain actually performs its many 


XXXvi 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


cognitive miracles and how best to pursue the still vital 
enterprise of constructing various forms of artificial intel- 
ligence. Should we simply press past the obvious limitations 
of biological systems (limitations mostly of speed and re- 
liability) and pursue the dazzling potential of electronic 
systems, systems that can, in principle and even with a von 
Neumann architecture, implement or simulate any possible 
computational activities? Or should we attempt instead, for 
whatever reasons, to mimic the computational organization 
displayed in the brains of insects, fishes, birds, and mam- 
mals? And what organization is that, anyway? Is it impor- 
tantly or interestingly different from what goes on in our 
artificial machines? 

Here, the reader may be surprised to discover, John von 
Neumann weighs in with a prescient, powerful, and decid- 
edly nonclassical answer. He spends the first half of the 
book leading the reader stepwise through the classical con- 
ceptions for which he is so famously responsible, and as he 
turns finally to address the brain, he hazards the initial 
conclusion that “its functioning is prima facie digital.” But this 
initial take on the neuronal data is also prima facie procrus- 
tean, a fact that von Neumann acknowledges immediately 
and subsequently turns to pursue at length. 

The first problem he notes is that the connections be- 
tween neurons do not show the telltale “two lines in and 
one line out” configuration that classical and-gates and or- 


gates display. Though each cell typically projects exactly one 


XXXVIl 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


output axon, as the classical take would require, each cell 
receives more than a hundred, even more than several thou- 
sand, inputs from many other neurons. This fact is not 
decisive—there are, for example, multivalent logics. But it 
does give him pause. 

The plot thickens as von Neumann pursues a point-by- 
point comparison between the fundamental dimensions of 
the brain’s “basic active organs” (presumptively, the neu- 
rons) and the computer’s “basic active organs” (the various 
logic gates). Spatially, he observes, neurons have the advan- 
tage of being at least 107 times smaller than their presump- 
tive electronic counterparts. (At the time, this estimate was 
exactly right, but with the unforeseen advent of photo- 
etched microchips, this size advantage has simply dis- 
appeared, at least where two-dimensional sheets are con- 
cerned. We can forgive von Neumann this one.) 

More important, neurons have a major disadvantage 
where the speed of their operations is concerned. Neurons 
are, he estimates, perhaps 10° times slower than vacuum 
tubes or transistors in the time required to complete a basic 
logical operation. Here he is portentously correct, in ways 
about to emerge. If anything, he underestimates the neu- 
ron’s very considerable disadvantage. If we assume that a 
neuron can have a “clock frequency” of no better than 
roughly 10? Hz, then the clock frequencies of almost 1,000 
MHz (that is, 10? basic operations per second) now dis- 


played in the most recent generation of desktop machines 


XXXVIii 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


push the neuron’s disadvantage closer to a factor of 10’. The 
conclusion is inescapable. If the brain is a digital computer 
with a von Neumann architecture, it is doomed to be a 
computational tortoise by comparison. 

Additionally, the accuracy with which the biological 
brain can represent any variable is also many orders of mag- 
nitude below the accuracies available to a digital computer. 
Computers, von Neumann observes, can easily use and ma- 
nipulate eight, ten, or twelve decimal places of representa- 
tion, while the neuron’s presumed mode of representa- 
tion—the frequency of the spike train it sends down its 
axon—appears limited to a representational accuracy of at 
most two decimal places (specifically, plus or minus per- 
haps 1 percent of a frequency maximum of roughly 100 
Hz). This is troubling because, in the course of any com- 
putation that involves a great many steps, small errors of 
representation in the early steps regularly accumulate into 
larger errors at the closing steps. Worse, he adds, for many 
important classes of computation, even tiny errors in the 
early steps get exponentially amplified in subsequent steps, 
which inevitably leads to wildly inaccurate final outputs. 
Thus, if the brain is a digital computer with only two deci- 
mal places of representational accuracy, it is doomed to be a 
computational dunce. 

Conjointly, these two severe limitations—one on speed, 
and the other on accuracy—drive von Neumann to the con- 


clusion that whatever computational regime the brain is 


XXXiX 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


using, it must be one that somehow involves a minimum of 
what he calls “logical depth.” That is, whatever the brain 
is doing, it cannot be sequentially performing thousands 
upon thousands of sequentially orchestrated computational 
steps, as in the super-high frequency, recursive activity of a 
digital machine’s central processor. Given the slowness of 
its neuronal activities, there isn’t enough time for the brain 
to complete any but the most trivial of computations. And 
given the low accuracy of its typical representations, it 
would be computationally incompetent even if it did have 
enough time. 

This is a poignant conclusion for von Neumann to have 
reached because it is obvious that, despite the preceding 
limitations, the brain somehow manages to perform a great 
variety of sophisticated computations, and it does so, more- 
over, in the twinkling of an eye. But there is nothing wrong 
with his arguments. The limitations he points to are entirely 
genuine. What, then, are we to make of the brain? 

As von Neumann correctly perceives, the brain’s com- 
putational regime appears to compensate for its inescapable 
lack of logical depth by exploiting an extraordinary logical 
breadth. As he says, “large and efficient natural automata are 
likely to be highly parallel, while large and efficient artificial 
automata will tend to be less so, and rather to be serial” 
(emphasis his). The former “will tend to pick up as many 
logical (or informational) items as possible simultaneously, and 


process them simultaneously” (emphasis ours). This means, he 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


adds, that we must reach out, beyond the brain’s neurons, to 
include all of its many synapses in our all-up count of the 
brain’s “basic active organs.” 

These are all major insights. As we now know, the brain 
contains roughly 10!* synaptic connections, each of which 
modulates the arriving axonal signal before passing it on to 
the receiving neuron. The job of the neuron is then to sum, 
or otherwise integrate, the inputs from those synaptic con- 
nections (as many as 10,000 onto a single cell) and generate 
its own axonal output in turn. Most important, these tiny 
modulatory actions all take place simultaneously. This means 
that, with each synapse being active perhaps 100 times per 
second (recall that typical spiking frequencies are in the range 
of 100 Hz), the total number of basic information-processing 
actions performed by the brain must be roughly 10? times 
10!*, or 10! operations per second! This is a striking achieve- 
ment for any system, and it compares very favorably with our 
earlier count of 10° basic operations per second for a cutting- 
edge desktop machine. The brain is neither a tortoise nor a 
dunce after all, for it was never a serial, digital machine to 
begin with: it is a massively parallel analog machine. 

This much von Neumann suggests herein, and modern 
neuroscience and the computer modeling of parallel net- 
works tend strongly to confirm it. The alternative computa- 
tional strategy on which von Neumann speculated now 
appears to be an instance of the simultaneous multiplication of 


each of many thousands or millions of simultaneous axonal 


xli 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


spiking frequencies (which constitute a very large input vec- 
tor) by the coefficients of an even larger matrix (namely, the 
configuration of the many millions of synaptic junctions 
that connect one neuronal population to the next) to pro- 
duce an output vector (namely, a new and different pattern of 
simultaneous spiking frequencies across the receiving pop- 
ulation of neurons). It is the acquired global configuration 
of those many millions, nay trillions, of synaptic connec- 
tions that embodies whatever knowledge and skills the 
brain may have acquired. And it is those same synaptic 
connections that so swiftly perform the computational 
transformations upon any axonal inputs—from the senses, 
for example—that arrive at their collective doorstep. This 
yields both the speed and the freedom from recursively 
amplified errors that von Neumann deemed essential. 

It must quickly be said, however, that this decisive insight 
does nothing to dim the integrity of his digital and serial 
technologies, nor does it dim our hopes for creating artificial 
intelligence. Quite the contrary. We can make electronic 
versions of synaptic connections, and, eschewing the classi- 
cal von Neumann architecture, we can create vast parallel 
networks of artificial neurons, thus realizing electronic ver- 
sions of the “shallow-depth” but “extraordinary-breadth” 
computational regime evidently exploited by the brain. 
These will have the additional and most intriguing property 
of being roughly 10° times faster, overall, than their biolog- 


ical namesakes, simply because they will have electronic 


xlii 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


rather than biochemical components. This means many 
things. For one, a synapse-for-synapse electronic duplicate of 
your biological brain could enjoy, in only thirty seconds, a 
train of thought that would consume a year’s time as con- 
ducted by the components within your own skull. And that 
same machine could enjoy, in half an hour, an intellectual 
life that would consume your entire three-score-and-ten 
years, if conducted within your own brain. Intelligence, 
clearly, has an interesting future. 

A note of caution must here be sounded. It is true that 
smallish artificial neural networks have already been con- 
structed on the assumption that synapses are tiny multi- 
pliers, that neurons are tiny summators with a sigmoid 
output function, and that information is coded solely in the 
frequency of neuronal spiking. And it is true that many of 
these networks display remarkable “cognitive” talents, at 
least after lengthy training. But these same network models, 
analog and massively parallel though they may be, exhibit 
little of the subtlety and variety displayed in the behavior of 
real synapses and real neurons. Unfolding neuroscientific 
research continues to teach us, just as it taught von Neu- 
mann, that our first-pass models of brain activity are, at 
best, crude approximations of the neurocomputational re- 
ality, and they may turn out to be just as mistaken as the 
historical guess—here challenged by von Neumann—that 
the brain’s operations are primarily digital. There is more 


than one way to code information in an axon’s behavior; 


xliii 


FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION 


there is more than one way to modulate it at a synapse; and 
there is more than one way to integrate it within a neuron. 
Our current models function well enough to capture our 
imaginations, but the brain still harbors many puzzles, and 
it portends major surprises yet to come. Our business here 
is far from done, and we must be as humble before the 
empirical facts as von Neumann evidently was. 

Von Neumann is responsible for the computational archi- 
tecture that underlies almost all of the twentieth century’s 
“computer revolution,” a revolution that will have an impact 
on humanity’s long-term future at least as great as Isaac 
Newton’s mechanics or James Maxwell’s electromagnetics. 
Moreover, von Neumann had the character and the insight, 
where the biological brain is concerned, to see past his own 
computational architecture to the outlines of'a new explana- 
tory paradigm of perhaps even greater power. 

At the end of broad discussions on the nature of intel- 
ligence, one often hears a commentator call out, in hope, 
for the arrival of someone to serve as “the Newton of the 
mind.” We wish to end ona different note. As the preceding 
commentary suggests, and as the following book illustrates, 
there is a strong case to be made that the hoped-for Newton 
has already come and, alas, already gone. His name is John 
von Neumann. 


Paul and Patricia Churchland 


xliv 


PREFACE 


To give the Silliman Lectures, one of the oldest and most 
outstanding academic lecture series in the United States, is 
considered a privilege and an honor among scholars all 
over the world. Traditionally the lecturer is asked to give a 
series of talks, over a period of about two weeks, and then 
to shape the manuscript of the lectures into a book to be 
published under the auspices of Yale University, the home 
and headquarters of the Silliman Lectures. 

Early in 1955 my husband, John von Neumann, was in- 
vited by Yale University to give the Silliman Lectures during 
the spring term of 1956, some time in late March or early 
April. Johnny was deeply honored and gratified by this 
invitation, despite the fact that he had to make his accep- 
tance subject to one condition—namely, that the lectures be 
limited to one week only. The accompanying manuscript 
would, however, cover more fully his chosen topic—The 
Computer and the Brain—a theme in which he had been 
interested for a considerable time. The request to abbreviate 


the lecture period was made of necessity, as he had just been 


xlv 


PREFACE 


appointed by President Eisenhower as one of the members 
of the Atomic Energy Commission, a full-time job which 
does not permit even a scientist much time away from his 
desk in Washington. My husband knew, however, that he 
could find time to write the lectures, for he had always done 
his writing at home during the night or at dawn. His capac- 
ity for work was practically unlimited, particularly if he was 
interested, and the many unexplored possibilities of autom- 
ata did interest him very much indeed; so he felt quite 
confident that he could prepare a full manuscript even 
though the lecture period would have to be somewhat cut. 
Yale University, helpful and understanding at this early pe- 
riod as well as later, when there was only sadness, sorrow, 
and need, accepted this arrangement, and Johnny started 
his new job at the Commission with the added incentive 
that he would continue his work on the theory of automata 
even if it was done a little en cache. 

In the spring of 1955 we moved from Princeton to Wash- 
ington, and Johnny went on leave of absence from the In- 
stitute for Advanced Study, where he had been Professor in 
the School of Mathematics since 1933. 

Johnny was born in Budapest, Hungary, in 1903. Even in 
his early years he had shown a remarkable ability and interest 
in scientific matters, and as a child his almost photographic 
memory manifested itself in many unusual ways. Reaching 
college age, he studied first chemistry and then mathematics 


at the University of Berlin, the Technische Hochschule in 


xlvi 


PREFACE 


Zurich, and the University of Budapest. In 1927 he was 
appointed Privatdozent at the University of Berlin, probably 
one of the youngest persons appointed to such a position in 
any of the German universities within the last few decades. 
Later Johnny taught at the University of Hamburg, and in 
1930, for the first time, crossed the Atlantic, having accepted 
the invitation of Princeton University to become a guest 
lecturer for one year. In 1931 he became a member of the 
faculty of Princeton University, thus making his permanent 
home in the United States and becoming a citizen of the New 
World. During the 1920’s and 30’s Johnny’s scientific inter- 
est was ranging widely, mostly in theoretical fields. His 
publications included works on quantum theory, mathe- 
matical logic, ergodic theory, continuous geometry, prob- 
lems dealing with rings of operators, and many other areas 
of pure mathematics. Then, during the late thirties, he be- 
came interested in questions of theoretical hydrodynamics, 
particularly in the great difficulties encountered in obtaining 
solutions to partial differential equations by known analyt- 
ical methods. This endeavor, carried forward when war 
clouds were darkening the horizon all over the world, 
brought him into scientific defense work and made him 
more and more interested in the applied fields of mathemat- 
ics and physics. The interaction of shock waves, a very intri- 
cate hydrodynamic problem, became one of the important 
defense research interests, and the tremendous amount of 


calculations required to get some of the answers motivated 


xlvii 


PREFACE 


Johnny to employ a high-speed computing machine for this 
purpose. The ENIAC, built in Philadelphia for the Ballistic 
Research Laboratories of Army Ordnance, was Johnny’s first 
introduction to the vast possibilities of solving many yet 
unresolved questions with the aid of automation. He helped 
to modify some of the mathematical-logical design of the 
ENIAC, and from then until his last conscious hours, he 
remained interested in and intrigued by the still unexplored 
aspects and possibilities of the fast-growing use of automata. 

In 1943, soon after the Manhattan Project was started, 
Johnny became one of the scientists who “disappeared into 
the West,” commuting back and forth between Washing- 
ton, Los Alamos, and many other places. This was the pe- 
riod during which he became completely convinced, and 
tried to convince others in many varied fields, that numeri- 
cal calculations done on fast electronic computing devices 
would substantially facilitate the solution of many difficult, 
unsolved, scientific problems. 

After the war, together with a small group of selected 
engineers and mathematicians, Johnny built, at the Institute 
for Advanced Study, an experimental electronic calculator, 
popularly known as the JONrAc, which eventually became 
the pilot model for similar machines all over the country. 
Some of the basic principles developed in the JonrAc are 
used even today in the fastest and most modern calculators. 
To design the machine, Johnny and his co-workers tried to 


imitate some of the known operations of the live brain. This 


xlviii 


PREFACE 


is the aspect which led him to study neurology, to seek out 
men in the fields of neurology and psychiatry, to attend 
many meetings on these subjects, and, eventually, to give 
lectures to such groups on the possibilities of copying an 
extremely simplified model of the living brain for man- 
made machines. In the Silliman Lectures these thoughts 
were to be further developed and expanded. 

During the postwar years Johnny divided his work among 
scientific problems in various fields. Particularly, he became 
interested in meteorology, where numerical calculations 
seemed to be helpful in opening entirely new vistas; part of 
his time was spent helping to make calculations in the ever- 
expanding problems of nuclear physics. He continued to 
work closely with the laboratories of the Atomic Energy 
Commission, and in 1952 he became a member of the 
General Advisory Committee to the AEC. 

On March 15, 1955, Johnny was sworn in as a member of 
the Atomic Energy Commission, and early in May we moved 
our household to Washington. Three months later, in Au- 
gust, the pattern of our active and exciting life, centered 
around my husband’s indefatigable and astounding mind, 
came to an abrupt stop; Johnny had developed severe pains 
in his left shoulder, and after surgery, bone cancer was 
diagnosed. The ensuing months were of alternating hope 
and despair; sometimes we were confident that the lesion in 
the shoulder was a single manifestation of the dread disease, 


not to recur for a long time, but then indefinable aches and 


xlix 


PREFACE 


pains that he suffered from at times dashed our hopes for the 
future. Throughout this period Johnny worked feverishly— 
during the day in his office or making the many trips re- 
quired by the job; at night on scientific papers, things which 
he had postponed until he would be through with his term 
at the Commission. He now started to work systematically 
on the manuscript for the Silliman Lectures; most of what is 
written in the following pages was produced in those days of 
uncertainty and waiting. In late November the next blow 
came: several lesions were found on his spine, and he devel- 
oped serious difficulties in walking. From then on, every- 
thing went from bad to worse, though still there was some 
hope left that with treatment and care the fatal illness might 
be arrested, for a while at least. 

By January 1956 Johnny was confined to a wheelchair, 
but still he attended meetings, was wheeled into his office, 
and continued working on the manuscript for the lecture. 
Clearly his strength was waning from day to day; all trips 
and speaking engagements had to be canceled one by one, 
with this single exception—the Silliman Lectures. There 
was some hope that with X-ray treatments the spine might 
be, at least temporarily, sufficiently strengthened by late 
March to permit his traveling to New Haven and fulfilling 
this one obligation that meant so very much to him. Even 
so, the Silliman Lecture Committee had to be asked further 
to reduce the lectures to one or two at the most, for the 


strain of a whole week of lecturing would have been dan- 


PREFACE 


gerous in his weakened condition. By March, however, all 
false hopes were gone, and there was no longer any ques- 
tion of Johnny being able to travel anywhere. Again Yale 
University, as helpful and understanding as ever, did not 
cancel the lectures, but suggested that if the manuscript 
could be delivered, someone else would read it for him. In 
spite of many efforts, Johnny could not finish writing his 
planned lectures in time; as a matter of tragic fate he could 
never finish writing them at all. 

In early April Johnny was admitted to Walter Reed Hospi- 
tal; he never left the hospital grounds again until his death 
on February 8, 1957. The unfinished manuscript of the 
Silliman Lectures went with him to the hospital, where he 
made a few more attempts to work on it; but by then the 
illness had definitely gained the upper hand, and even John- 
ny’s exceptional mind could not overcome the weariness of 
the body. 

I should like to be permitted to express my deep gratitude 
to the Silliman Lecture Committee, to Yale University, and 
to the Yale University Press, all of which have been so help- 
ful and kind during the last, sad years of Johnny’s life and 
now honor his memory by admitting his unfinished and 
fragmentary manuscript to the series of the Silliman Lec- 
tures Publications. 

Klara von Neumann 


Washington, D.C., September 1957 


This page intentionally left blank 


INTRODUCTION 


Since I am neither a neurologist nor a psychiatrist, but a 
mathematician, the work that follows requires some expla- 
nation and justification. It is an approach toward the under- 
standing of the nervous system from the mathematician’s 
point of view. However, this statement must immediately be 
qualified in both of its essential parts. 

First, it isan overstatement to describe what I am attempt- 
ing here as an “approach toward the understanding”; it is 
merely a somewhat systematized set of speculations as to 
how such an approach ought to be made. That is, Iam trying 
to guess which of the—mathematically guided—lines of 
attack seem, from the hazy distance in which we see most of 
them, a priori promising, and which ones have the opposite 
appearance. I will also offer some rationalizations of these 
guesses. 

Second, the “mathematician’s point of view,” as I would 
like to have it understood in this context, carries a distribu- 
tion of emphases that differs from the usual one: apart from 


the stress on the general mathematical techniques, the logi- 


INTRODUCTION 


cal and the statistical aspects will be in the foreground. 
Furthermore, logics and statistics should be primarily, al- 
though not exclusively, viewed as the basic tools of “infor- 
mation theory.” Also, that body of experience which has 
grown up around the planning, evaluating, and coding of 
complicated logical and mathematical automata will be the 
focus of much of this information theory. The most typical, 
but not the only, such automata are, of course, the large 
electronic computing machines. 

Let me note, in passing, that it would be very satisfactory 
if one could talk about a “theory” of such automata. Regret- 
tably, what at this moment exists—and to what I must ap- 
peal—can as yet be described only as an imperfectly articu- 
lated and hardly formalized “body of experience.” 

Lastly, my main aim is actually to bring out a rather dif- 
ferent aspect of the matter. I suspect that a deeper mathe- 
matical study of the nervous system—“mathematical” in 
the sense outlined above—will affect our understanding of 
the aspects of mathematics itself that are involved. In fact, it 
may alter the way in which we look on mathematics and 
logics proper. I will try to explain my reasons for this belief 


later. 


THE COMPUTER 


I begin by discussing some of the principles underlying the 
systematics and the practice of computing machines. 
Existing computing machines fall into two broad classes: 
“analog” and “digital.” This subdivision arises according to 
the way in which the numbers, on which the machine 


operates, are represented in it. 


The Analog Procedure 


In an analog machine each number is represented by a 
suitable physical quantity, whose values, measured in some 
pre-assigned unit, is equal to the number in question. This 
quantity may be the angle by which a certain disk has ro- 
tated, or the strength ofa certain current, or the amount ofa 
certain (relative) voltage, etc. To enable the machine to 
compute, i.e. to operate on these numbers according to a 
predetermined plan, it is necessary to provide organs (or 
components) that can perform on these representative 


quantities the basic operations of mathematics. 


THE COMPUTER 


The Conventional Basic Operations 


These basic operations are usually understood to be the 
“four species of arithmetic”: addition (the operation x + y), 
subtraction (x -y), multiplication (xy), division (x/y). 
Thus it is obviously not difficult to add or to subtract two 
currents (by merging them in parallel or in antiparallel direc- 
tions). Multiplication (of two currents) is more difficult, but 
there exist various kinds of electrical componentry which will 
perform this operation. The same is true for division (of one 
current by another). (For multiplication as well as for division 
—but not for addition and subtraction—of course the unit in 


which the current is measured is relevant.) 


Unusual Basic Operations 


A rather remarkable attribute of some analog machines, on 
which I will have to comment a good deal further, is this. 
Occasionally the machine is built around other “basic” op- 
erations than the four species of arithmetic mentioned 
above. Thus the classical “differential analyzer,” which ex- 
presses numbers by the angles by which certain disks have 
rotated, proceeds as follows. Instead of addition, x + y, and 
subtraction, x - y, the operations (x + y)/2 are offered, 
because a readily available, simple component, the “dif- 
ferential gear” (the same one that is used on the back axle of 
an automobile) produces these. Instead of multiplication, 


xy, an entirely different procedure is used: In the differential 


THE ANALOG PROCEDURE 


analyzer all quantities appear as functions of time, and the 
differential analyzer makes use of an organ called the “inte- 
grator,” which will, for two such quantities x(t), y(t) form 
the (“Stieltjes”) integral z(t) = f‘x(t) dy(t). 

The point in this scheme is threefold: 

First: the three above operations will, in suitable com- 
binations, reproduce three of the four usual basic opera- 
tions, namely addition, subtraction, and multiplication. 

Second: in combination with certain “feedback” tricks, 
they will also generate the fourth operation, division. I will 
not discuss the feedback principle here, except by saying 
that while it has the appearance of a device for solving 
implicit relations, it is in reality a particularly elegant short- 
circuited iteration and successive approximation scheme. 

Third, and this is the true justification of the differential 
analyzer: its basic operations (x + y)/2 and integration are, 
for wide classes of problems, more economical than the 
arithmetical ones (x+y, x-y, xy, x/y). More specifically: any 
computing machine that is to solve a complex mathematical 
problem must be “programmed” for this task. This means 
that the complex operation of solving that problem must be 
replaced by a combination of the basic operations of the 
machine. Frequently it means something even more subtle: 
approximation of that operation—to any desired (prescribed) 
degree—by such combinations. Now for a given class of 
problems one set of basic operations may be more efficient, 


ie. allow the use of simpler, less extensive, combinations, 


THE COMPUTER 


than another such set. Thus, in particular, for systems of total 
differential equations—for which the differential analyzer 
was primarily designed—the above-mentioned basic opera- 
tions of that machine are more efficient than the previously 
mentioned arithmetical basic operations (x + y, x - y, xy, 


x/y). 
Next, I pass to the digital class of machines. 


The Digital Procedure 


In a decimal digital machine each number is represented in 
the same way as in conventional writing or printing, i.e. as a 
sequence of decimal digits. Each decimal digit, in turn, is 


represented by a system of “markers.” 


Markers, Their Combinations and Embodiments 


A marker which can appear in ten different forms suffices 
by itself to represent a decimal digit. A marker which can 
appear in two different forms only will have to be used so 
that each decimal digit corresponds to a whole group. (A 
group of three two-valued markers allows 8 combinations; 
this is inadequate. A group of four such markers allows 16 
combinations; this is more than adequate. Hence, groups of 
at least four markers must be used per decimal digit. There 
may be reasons to use larger groups; see below.) An exam- 


ple ofa ten-valued marker is an electrical pulse that appears 


THE DIGITAL PROCEDURE 


on one of ten pre-assigned lines. A two-valued marker is an 
electrical pulse on a pre-assigned line, so that its presence or 
absence conveys the information (the marker’s “value”). 
Another possible two-valued marker is an electrical pulse 
that can have positive or negative polarity. There are, of 
course, many other equally valid marker schemes. 

I will make one more observation on markers: The above- 
mentioned ten-valued marker is clearly a group of ten two- 
valued markers, in other words, highly redundant in the 
sense noted above. The minimum group, consisting of four 
two-valued markers, can also be introduced within the same 
framework. Consider a system of four pre-assigned lines, 
such that (simultaneous) electrical pulses can appear on any 
combination of these. This allows for 16 combinations, any 
10 of which can be stipulated to correspond to the decimal 
digits. 

Note that these markers, which are usually electrical 
pulses (or possibly electrical voltages or currents, lasting as 
long as their indication is to be valid), must be controlled 


by electrical gating devices. 


Digital Machine Types and Their Basic Components 


In the course of the development up to now, electrome- 
chanical relays, vacuum tubes, crystal diodes, ferromag- 
netic cores, and transistors have been successively used— 


some of them in combination with others, some of them 


THE COMPUTER 


preferably in the memory organs of the machine (cf. be- 
low), and others preferably outside the memory (in the 
“active” organs) —giving rise to as many different species of 


digital machines. 


Parallel and Serial Schemes 


Now a number in the machine is represented by a sequence 
of ten-valued markers (or marker groups), which may be 
arranged to appear simultaneously, in different organs of 
the machine—in parallel—or in temporal succession, in a 
single organ of the machine—in series. If the machine is built 
to handle, say, twelve-place decimal numbers, e.g. with six 
places “to the left” of the decimal point, and six “to the 
right,” then twelve such markers (or marker groups) will 
have to be provided in each information channel of the 
machine that is meant for passing numbers. (This scheme 
can—and is in various machines—be made more flexible in 
various ways and degrees. Thus, in almost all machines, the 
position of the decimal point is adjustable. However, I will 


not go into these matters here any further.) 


The Conventional Basic Operations 


The operations of a digital machine have so far always been 
based on the four species of arithmetic. Regarding the well- 
known procedures that are being used, the following should 
be said: 


THE DIGITAL PROCEDURE 


First, on addition: in contrast to the physical processes 
that mediate this process in analog machines (cf. above), in 
this case rules of strict and logical character control this 
operation—how to form digital sums, when to produce a 
carry, and how to repeat and combine these operations. The 
logical nature of the digital sum becomes even clearer when 
the binary (rather than decimal) system is used. Indeed, the 
binary addition table (0 +0 =00,0+1=1+0=01,1+15 
10) can be stated thus: The sum digit is 1 if the two addend 
digits differ, otherwise it is 0; the carry digit is 1 if both 
addend digits are 1, otherwise it is o. Because of the possible 
presence of a carry digit, one actually needs a binary addi- 
tion table for three terms (0 +0 +0=00,0+0+1=0414 
O=I+OFO0=O1,O0F1+1=1+0+F1=1+1+0=10,1 +1 
+1=11),and this states: The sum digit is 1, if the number of 
1’s among the addend (including the carry) digits is odd (1 
or 3), otherwise it is 0; the carry digit is 1 if the 1’s among 
the addend (including the carry) digits form a majority (2 
or 3), otherwise it is o. 

Second, on subtraction: the logical structure of this is 
very similar to that one of addition. It can even be—and 
usually is—reduced to the latter by the simple device of 
“complementing” the subtrahend. 

Third, on multiplication: the primarily logical character is 
even more obvious—and the structure more involved—than 
for addition. The products (of the multiplicand) with each 


digit of the multiplier are formed (usually preformed for all 


THE COMPUTER 


possible decimal digits, by various addition schemes), and 
then added together (with suitable shifts). Again, in the 
binary system the logical character is even more transparent 
and obvious. Since the only possible digits are o and 1, a 
(multiplier) digital product (of the multiplicand) is omitted 
for o and it is the multiplicand itself for 1. 

All of this applies to products of positive factors. When 
both factors may have both signs, additional logical rules 
control the four situations that can arise. 

Fourth, on division: the logical structure is comparable to 
that of the multiplication, except that now various iterated, 
trial-and-error subtraction procedures intervene, with spe- 
cific logical rules (for the forming of the quotient digits) in 
the various alternative situations that can arise, and that 
must be dealt with according to a serial, repetitive scheme. 

To sum up: all these operations now differ radically from 
the physical processes used in analog machines. They all are 
patterns of alternative actions, organized in highly repetitive 
sequences, and governed by strict and logical rules. Espe- 
cially in the cases of multiplication and division these rules 
have a quite complex logical character. (This may be ob- 
scured by our long and almost instinctive familiarity with 
them, butif one forces oneself to state them fully, the degree 


of their complexity becomes apparent.) 


Ke) 


LOGICAL CONTROL 


Logical Control 


Beyond the capability to execute the basic operations singly, 
a computing machine must be able to perform them accord- 
ing to the sequence—or rather, the logical pattern—in which 
they generate the solution of the mathematical problem that 
is the actual purpose of the calculation in hand. In the 
traditional analog machines—typified by the “differential 
analyzer” —this “sequencing” of the operation is achieved in 
this way. There must bea priori enough organs present in the 
machine to perform as many basic operations as the desired 
calculation calls for—i.e. enough “differential gears” and 
“integrators” (for the two basic operations (x + y)/2 and 
J‘ x(t) dy(t), respectively, cf. above). These—i.e. their “input” 
and “output” disks (or, rather, the axes of these) —must then 
be so connected to each other (by cogwheel connections in 
the early models, and by electrical follower-arrangements 
[“selsyns” ] in the later ones) as to constitute a replica of the 
desired calculation. It should be noted that this connection- 
pattern can be set up at will—indeed, this is the means by 
which the problem to be solved, i.e. the intention of the user, 
is impressed on the machine. This “setting up” occurred in 
the early (cog wheel-connected, cf. above) machines by 
mechanical means, while in the later (electrically con- 
nected, cf. above) machines it was done by plugging. Never- 
theless, it was in all these types always a fixed setting for the 


entire duration of a problem. 


THE COMPUTER 


Plugged Control 


In some of the very last analog machines a further trick was 
introduced. These had electrical, “plugged” connections. 
These plugged connections were actually controlled by elec- 
tromechanical relays, and hence they could be changed by 
electrical stimulation of the magnets that closed or opened 
these relays. These electrical stimuli could be controlled by 
punched paper tapes, and these tapes could be started and 
stopped (and restarted and restopped, etc.) by electrical 


signals derived at suitable moments from the calculation. 


Logical Tape Control 


The latter reference means that certain numerical organs in 
the machine have reached certain preassigned conditions, 
e.g. that the sign of a certain number has turned negative, or 
that a certain number has been exceeded by another certain 
number, etc. Note that if numbers are defined by electrical 
voltages or currents, then their signs can be sensed by rec- 
tifier arrangements; for a rotating disk the sign shows 
whether it has passed a zero position moving right or mov- 
ing left; a number is exceeded by another one when the 
sign of their difference turns negative, etc. Thus a “logical” 
tape control—or, better still, a “state of calculation com- 
bined with tape” control—was superposed over the basic, 


“fixed connections” control. 




LOGICAL CONTROL 


The digital machines started off-hand with different con- 
trol systems. However, before discussing these I will make 
some general remarks that bear on digital machines, and on 


their relationship to analog machines. 


The Principle of Only One Organ for Each Basic Operation 


It must be emphasized, to begin with, that in digital ma- 
chines there is uniformly only one organ for each basic 
operation. This contrasts with most analog machines, 
where there must be enough organs for each basic opera- 
tion, depending on the requirements of the problem in 
hand (cf. above). It should be noted, however, that this is a 
historical fact rather than an intrinsic requirement—analog 
machines (of the electrically connected type, cf. above) 
could, in principle, be built with only one organ for each 
basic operation, and a logical control of any of the digital 
types to be described below. (Indeed, the reader can verify 
for himself without much difficulty, that the “very latest” 
type of analog machine control, described above, repre- 
sents a transition to this modus operandi.) 

It should be noted, furthermore, that some digital ma- 
chines deviate more or less from this “only one organ for 
each basic operation” principle—but these deviations can 
be brought back to the orthodox scheme by rather simple 


reinterpretations. (In some cases it is merely a matter of 


B 


THE COMPUTER 


dealing with a duplex [or multiplex] machine, with suit- 
able means of intercommunication.) I will not go into these 


matters here any further. 


The Consequent Need for a Special Memory Organ 


The “only one organ for each basic operation” principle 
necessitates, however, the providing for a larger number of 
organs that can be used to store numbers passively—the 
results of various partial, intermediate calculations. That is, 
each such organ must be able to “store” a number—remov- 
ing the one it may have stored previously—accepting it 
from some other organ to which it is at the time connected, 
and to “repeat” it upon “questioning”: to emit it to some 
other organ to which it is at that (other) time connected. 
Such an organ is called a “memory register,” the totality of 
these organs is called a “memory,” and the number of regis- 
ters ina memory in the “capacity” of that memory. 

I can now pass to the discussion of the main modes of 
control for digital machines. This is best done by describing 
two basic types, and mentioning some obvious principles 


for combining them. 


Control by “Control Sequence” Points 


The first basic method of control, which has been widely 
used, can be described (with some simplifications and ide- 


alizations) as follows: 


LOGICAL CONTROL 


The machine contains a number of logical control organs, 
called “control sequence points,” with the following func- 
tion. (The number of these control sequence points can be 
quite considerable. In some newer machines it reaches sev- 
eral hundred.) 

In the simplest mode of using this system, each control se- 
quence point is connected to one of the basic operation or- 
gans that it actuates, and also to the memory registers which 
are to furnish the numerical inputs of this operation, and to 
the one that is to receive its output. After a definite delay 
(which must be sufficient for the performing of the opera- 
tion), or after the receipt of a “performed” signal (if the 
duration of the operation is variable and its maximum indef- 
inite or unacceptably long—this procedure requires, of 
course, an additional connection with the basic operation 
organ in question), the control sequence point actuates the 
next control sequence point, its “successor.” This functions 
in turn, in a similar way, according to its own connections, 
etc. If nothing further is done, this furnishes the pattern for 
an unconditioned, repetitionless calculation. 

More sophisticated patterns obtain if some control se- 
quence points, to be called “branching points,” are con- 
nected to two “successors” and are capable of two states, say 
A and B, so that A causes the process to continue by way of 
the first “successor” and B by way of the second one. The 
control sequence point is normally in state A, but it is con- 


nected to two memory registers, certain events in which 




THE COMPUTER 


will cause it to go from A to B or from B to A, respectively— 
say the appearance of a negative sign in the first one will 
make it go from A to B, and the appearance of a negative 
sign in the second one will make it go from B to A. (Note: in 
addition to storing the digits of a number, cf. above, amem- 
ory register usually also stores its sign [+ or -]—for this 
a two-valued marker suffices.) Now all sorts of possibilities 
open up: The two “successors” may represent two alto- 
gether disjunct branches of the calculation, depending on 
suitably assigned numerical criteria (controlling “A to B,” 
while “B to A” is used to restore the original condition for a 
new computation). Possibly the two alternative branches 
may reunite later, in a common later successor. Still another 
possibility arises when one of the two branches, say the one 
controlled by A, actually leads back to the first mentioned 
(branching) control sequence point. In this case one deals 
with a repetitive procedure, which is iterated until a certain 
numerical criterion is met (the one that commands “A to 
B,” cf. above). This is, of course, the basic iterative process. 
All these tricks can be combined and superposed, etc. 

Note that in this case, as in the plugged type control for 
analog machines mentioned earlier, the totality of the (elec- 
trical) connections referred to constitutes the set-up of the 
problem—the expression of the problem to be solved, i.e. 
of the intention of the user. So this is again a plugged con- 


trol. As in the case referred to, the plugged pattern can be 




LOGICAL CONTROL 


changed from one problem to another, but—at least in the 
simplest arrangement—it is fixed for the entire duration of a 
problem. 

This method can be refined in many ways. Each control 
sequence point may be connected to several organs, stimu- 
lating more than one operation. The plugged connection 
may (as in an earlier example dealing with analog ma- 
chines) actually be controlled by electromechanical relays, 
and these can be (as outlined there) set up by tapes, which 
in turn may move under the control of electrical signals 
derived from events in the calculation. I will not go here any 


further into all the variations that this theme allows. 


Memory-Stored Control 


The second basic method of control, which has actually 
gone quite far toward displacing the first one, can be de- 
scribed (again with some simplifications) as follows. 

This scheme has, formally, some similarity with the 
plugged control scheme described above. However, the 
control sequence points are now replaced by “orders.” An 
order is, in most embodiments of this scheme, physically 
the same thing as a number (of the kind with which the 
machine deals, cf. above). Thus in a decimal machine it is a 
sequence of decimal digits. (12 decimal digits in the exam- 


ple given previously, with or without making use of the 


a7; 


THE COMPUTER 


sign, etc., cf. above. Sometimes more than one order is 
contained in this standard number space, but there is no 
need to go into this here.) 

An order must indicate which basic operation is to be 
performed, from which memory registers the inputs of that 
operation are to come, and to which memory register its 
output is to go. Note that this presupposes that all memory 
registers are numbered serially—the number of a memory 
register is called its “address.” It is convenient to number the 
basic operations, too. Then an order simply contains the 
number of its operation and the addresses of the memory 
registers referred to above, as a sequence of decimal digits 
(in a fixed order). 

There are some variants on this, which, however, are not 
particularly important in the present context: An order may, 
in the way described above, control more than one opera- 
tion; it may direct that the addresses that it contained be 
modified in certain specified ways before being applied in 
the process of its execution (the normally used—and prac- 
tically most important—address modification consists of 
adding to all the addresses in question the contents of a 
specified memory register). Alternatively, these functions 
may be controlled by special orders, or an order may affect 
only part of any of the constituent actions described above. 

A more important phase of each order is this. Like a 
control sequence point in the previous example, each order 


must determine its successor—with or without branching 




LOGICAL CONTROL 


(cf. above). As I pointed out above, an order is usually 
“physically” the same thing as a number. Hence the natural 
way to store it—in the course of the problem in whose 
control it participates—is in a memory register. In other 
words, each order is stored in the memory, in a definite 
memory register, that is to say, at a definite address. This 
opens up a number of specific ways to handle the matter of 
an orders successor. Thus it may be specified that the suc- 
cessor of an order at the address X is—unless the opposite is 
made explicit—the order at the address X + 1. “The op- 
posite” is a “transfer,” a special order that specifies that the 
successor is at an assigned address Y. Alternatively, each 
order may have the “transfer” clause in it, i.e. specify ex- 
plicitly the address of its successor. “Branching” is most 
conveniently handled by a “conditional transfer” order, 
which is one that specifies that the successor’s address is X or 
Y, depending on whether a certain numerical condition has 
arisen or not—e.g. whether a number at a given address Z is 
negative or not. Such an order must then contain a number 
that characterizes this particular type of order (thus playing 
a similar role, and occupying the same position, as the basic 
operation number referred to further above), and the ad- 
dresses X, Y, Z, as a sequence of decimal digits (cf. above). 
Note the important difference between this mode of con- 
trol and the plugged one, described earlier: There the con- 
trol sequence points were real, physical objects, and their 


plugged connections expressed the problem. Now the or- 




THE COMPUTER 


ders are ideal entities, stored in the memory, and it is thus 
the contents of this particular segment of the memory that 
express the problem. Accordingly, this mode of control is 


called “memory-stored control.” 


Modus Operandi of the Memory-Stored Control 


In this case, since the orders that exercise the entire control 
are in the memory, a higher degree of flexibility is achieved 
than in any previous mode of control. Indeed, the machine, 
under the control of its orders, can extract numbers (or 
orders) from the memory, process them (as numbers!), and 
return them to the memory (to the same or to other loca- 
tions); i.e. it can change the contents of the memory— 
indeed this is its normal modus operandi. Hence it can, in 
particular, change the orders (since these are in the mem- 
ory!)—the very orders that control its actions. Thus all sorts 
of sophisticated order-systems become possible, which 
keep successively modifying themselves and hence also the 
computational processes that are likewise under their con- 
trol. In this way more complex processes than mere itera- 
tions become possible. Although all of this may sound far- 
fetched and complicated, such methods are widely used 
and very important in recent machine-computing—or, 
rather, computation-planning—practice. 

Of course, the order-system—this means the problem to 


be solved, the intention of the user—is communicated to 




LOGICAL CONTROL 


the machine by “loading” it into the memory. This is usu- 
ally done from a previously prepared tape or some other 


similar medium. 


Mixed Forms of Control 


The two modes of control described in the above—the 
plugged and the memory-stored—allow various combina- 
tions, about which a few words may be said. 

Consider a plugged control machine. Assume that it pos- 
sesses a memory of the type discussed in connection with 
the memory-stored control machines. It is possible to de- 
scribe the complete state of its plugging by a sequence of 
digits (of suitable length). This sequence can be stored in the 
memory; it is likely to occupy the space of several numbers, 
i.e. several, say consecutive, memory registers—in other 
words it will be found in a number of consecutive addresses, 
of which the first one may be termed its address, for short. 
The memory may be loaded with several such sequences, 
representing several different plugging schemes. 

In addition to this, the machine may also have a complete 
control of the memory-stored type. Aside from the orders 
that go naturally with that system (cf. above), it should also 
have orders of the following types. First: an order that causes 
the plugged set-up to be reset according to the digital se- 
quence stored at a specified memory address (cf. above). 


Second: a system of orders which change specified single 




THE COMPUTER 


items of plugging. (Note that both of these provisions neces- 
sitate that the plugging be actually effected by electrically 
controllable devices, i.e. by electromechanical relays [cf: the 
earlier discussion] or by vacuum tubes or by ferromagnetic 
cores, or the like.) Third: an order which turns the control 
of the machine from the memory-stored regime to the 
plugged regime. 

It is, of course, also necessary that the plugging scheme 
be able to designate the memory-stored control (presum- 
ably at a specified address) as the successor (or, in case of 


branching, as one successor) of a control sequence point. 


Mixed Numerical Procedures 


These remarks should suffice to give a picture of the flex- 
ibility which is inherent in these control modes and their 
combinations. 

A further class of “mixed” machine types that deserve 
mention is that where the analog and the digital principles 
occur together. To be more exact: This is a scheme where 
part of the machine is analog, part is digital, and the two 
communicate with each other (for numerical material) and 
are subject to a common control. Alternatively, each part 
may have its own control, in which case these two controls 
must communicate with each other (for logical material). 
This arrangement requires, of course, organs that can con- 


vert a digitally given number into an analogically given one, 


22, 


MIXED NUMERICAL PROCEDURES 


and conversely. The former means building up a continuous 
quantity from its digital expression, the latter means measur- 
ing a continuous quantity and expressing the result in digital 
form. Components of various kinds that perform these two 


tasks are well known, including fast electrical ones. 


Mixed Representations of Numbers. Machines Built on This Basis 


Another significant class of “mixed” machine types com- 
prises those machines in which each step of the computing 
procedure (but, of course, not of the logical procedure) 
combines analog and digital principles. The simplest occur- 
rence of this is when each number is represented in a part 
analog, part digital way. I will describe one such scheme, 
which has occasionally figured in component and machine 
construction and planning, and in certain types of com- 
munications, although no large-scale machine has ever been 
based on its use. 

In this system, which I shall call the “pulse density” sys- 
tem, each number is expressed by a sequence of successive 
electrical pulses (on a single line), so that the length of this 
sequence is indifferent but the average density of the pulse 
sequence (in time) is the number to be represented. Of 
course, one must specify two time intervals t,, t, (t, being 
considerably larger than t,), so that the averaging in ques- 
tion must be applied to durations lying between t, and t,. 


The unit of the number in question, when equated to this 




THE COMPUTER 


density, must be specified. Occasionally, it is convenient to 
let the density in question be equal not to the number itself 
but to a suitable (fixed) monotone function of it—e.g. the 
logarithm. (The purpose of this latter device is to obtain a 
better resolution of this representation when it is needed— 
when the number is small—and a poorer one when it is 
acceptable—when the number is large—and to have all con- 
tinuous shadings of this.) 

It is possible to devise organs which apply the four species 
of arithmetic to these numbers. Thus when the densities 
represent the numbers themselves, addition can be effected 
by combining the two sequences. The other operations are 
somewhat trickier—but adequate, and more or less elegant, 
procedures exist there, too. I shall not discuss how negative 
numbers, if needed, are represented—this is easily handled 
by suitable tricks, too. 

In order to have adequate precision, every sequence must 
contain many pulses within each time interval t, mentioned 
above. If, in the course of the calculation, a number is 
desired to change, the density of its sequence can be made 
to change accordingly, provided that this process is slow 
compared to the time interval t, mentioned above. 

For this type of machine the sensing of numerical condi- 
tions (e.g. for logical control purposes, cf. above) may be 
quite tricky. However, there are various devices which will 
convert such a number, i.e. a density of pulses in time, into 


an analog quantity. (E.g. the density of pulses, each of which 




PRECISION 


delivers a standard charge to a slowly leaking condenser 
[through a given resistance] will control it to a reasonably 
constant voltage level and leakage current—both of which 
are usable analog quantities.) These analog quantities can 
then be used for logical control, as discussed previously. 
After this description of the general principles of the 
functioning and control of computing machines, I will go 
on to some remarks about their actual use and the princi- 


ples that govern it. 


Precision 


Let me, first, compare the use of analog machines and of 
digital machines. 

Apart from all other considerations, the main limitation of 
analog machines relates to precision. Indeed, the precision 
of electrical analog machines rarely exceeds 1:10%, and even 
mechanical ones (like the differential analyzer) achieve at 
best 1:10* to 10°. Digital machines, on the other hand, can 
achieve any desired precision; e.g. the twelve-decimal ma- 
chine referred to earlier (for the reasons to be discussed 
further below, this is a rather typical level of precision for a 
modern digital machine) represents, of course, a precision 
1:10!*, Note also that increasing precision is much easier ina 
digital than in an analog regime: To go from 1:10 to 1:10* in 
a differential analyzer is relatively simple; from 1:10* to 1:10° 


is about the best present technology can do; from 1:10° to 




THE COMPUTER 


1:10° is (with present means) impossible. On the other 
hand, to go from 1:10!” to 1:10!3 in a digital machine means 
merely adding one place to twelve; this means usually no 
more than a relative increase in equipment (not every- 
where!) of 1/12 = 8.3 per cent, and an equal loss in speed 
(not everywhere!)—none of which is serious. The pulse 
density system is comparable to the analog system; in fact it 
is worse: the precision is intrinsically low. Indeed, a preci- 
sion of 1:10” requires that there be usually 107 pulses in the 
time interval t, (cf: above) —i.e. the speed of the machine is 
reduced by this fact alone by a factor of 100. Losses in speed 
of this order are, as a rule, not easy to take, and significantly 


larger ones would usually be considered prohibitive. 


Reasons for the High (Digital) Precision Requirements 


However, at this point another question arises: why are such 
extreme precisions (like the digital 1:10!) at all necessary? 
Why are the typical analog precisions (say 1:10*), or even 
those of the pulse density system (say 1:107), not adequate? 
In most problems of applied mathematics and engineering 
the data are no better than 1:10° or 1:10*, and often they do 
not even reach the level of 1:102, and the answers are not 
required or meaningful with higher precisions either. In 
chemistry, biology, or economics, or in other practical mat- 
ters, the precision levels are usually even less exacting. It has 


nevertheless been the uniform experience in modern high 




PRECISION 


speed computing that even precision levels like 1:10° are 
inadequate for a large part of important problems, and that 
digital machines with precision levels like 1:10'° and 1:10!* 
are fully justified in practice. The reasons for this surprising 
phenomenon are interesting and significant. They are con- 
nected with the inherent structure of our present mathe- 
matical and numerical procedures. 

The characteristic fact regarding these procedures is that 
when they are broken down into their constituent elements, 
they turn out to be very long. This holds for all problems that 
justify the use of a fast computing machine—ice. for all that 
have at least a medium degree of complexity. The underlying 
reason is that our present computational methods call for 
analyzing all mathematical functions into combinations of 
basic operations—and this means usually the four species of 
arithmetic, or something fairly comparable. Actually, most 
functions can only be approximated in this way, and this 
means in most cases quite long, possibly iteratively defined, 
sequences of basic operations (cf: above). In other words, the 
“arithmetical depth” of the necessary operations is usually 
quite great. Note that the “logical depth” is still greater, and by 
a considerable factor—that is, if, e.g, the four species of 
arithmetic are broken down into the underlying logical steps 
(cf. above), each one of them is a long logical chain by itself: 
However, I need to consider here only the arithmetical depth. 

Now if there are large numbers of arithmetical operations, 


the errors occurring in each operation are superposed. Since 




THE COMPUTER 


they are in the main (although not entirely) random, it 
follows that if there are N operations, the error will not be 
increased N times, but about VN times. This by itself will 
not, as a rule, suffice to necessitate a stepwise 1:10!” preci- 
sion for an over-all 1:10% result (cf: above). For this to be so, 
1/10!2-VN ~ 1/103 would be needed, i.e. N ~ 10!°, where- 
as even in the fastest modern machines N gets hardly larger 
than 101°. (A machine that performs an arithmetical opera- 
tion every 20 microseconds, and works on a single problem 
48 hours, represents a rather extreme case. Yet even here 
only N ~ 10!°!) However, another circumstance supervenes. 
The operations performed in the course of the calculation 
may amplify errors that were introduced by earlier opera- 
tions. This can cover any numerical gulf very quickly. The 
ratio used above, 1:10? to 1:10!, is 10°, yet 425 successive 
operations each of which increases an error by 5 per cent 
only, will account for it! I will not attempt any detailed and 
realistic estimate here, particularly because the art of com- 
puting consists to no small degree of measures to keep this 
effect down. The conclusion from a great deal of experience 
has been, at any rate, that the high precision levels referred to 
above are justified, as soon as reasonably complicated prob- 


lems are met with. 
Before leaving the immediate subject of computing ma- 


chines, I will say a few things about their speeds, sizes, and 
the like. 




CHARACTERISTICS OF MODERN DIGITAL MACHINES 


Characteristics of Modern Analog Machines 


The order of magnitude of the number of basic-operations 
organs in the largest existing analog machines is one or two 
hundred. The nature of these organs depends, of course, on 
the analog process used. In the recent past they have tended 
uniformly to be electrical or at least electromechanical (the 
mechanical stage serving for enhanced precision, cf: above). 
Where an elaborate logical control is provided (cf: above), 
this adds to the system (like all logical control of this type) 
certain typical digital action organs, like electromechanical 
relays or vacuum tubes (the latter would, in this case, not be 
driven at extreme speeds). The numbers of these may go as 
high as a few thousands. The investment represented by 
such a machine may, in extreme cases, reach the order of 


$1,000,000. 


Characteristics of Modern Digital Machines 


The organization of large digital machines is more com- 
plex. They are made up of “active” organs and of organs 
serving “memory” functions—I will include among the 
latter the “input” and “output” organs, although this is not 
common practice. 

The active organs are the following. First, organs which 
perform the basic logical actions: sense coincidences, com- 


bine stimuli, and possibly sense anticoincidences (no more 




THE COMPUTER 


than this is necessary, although sometimes organs for more 
complex logical operations are also provided). Second, 
organs which regenerate pulses: restore their gradually at- 
trited energy, or simply lift them from the energy level pre- 
vailing in one part of the machine to another (higher) 
energy level prevailing in another part (these two functions 
are called amplification)—which restore the desired (i.e. 
within certain tolerances, standardized) pulse-shape and 
timing. Note that the first-mentioned logical operations are 
the elements from which the arithmetical ones are built up 
(cf. above). 


Active Components; Questions of Speed 


All these functions have been performed, in historical suc- 
cession, by electromechanical relays, vacuum tubes, crystal 
diodes, and ferromagnetic cores and transistors (cf. above), 
or by various small circuits involving these. The relays per- 
mitted achieving speeds of about 10~* seconds per elemen- 
tary logical action, the vacuum tubes permitted improving 
this to the order of 10° to 10~¢ seconds (in extreme cases 
even one-half or one-quarter of the latter). The last group, 
collectively known as solid-state devices, came in on the 10°° 
second (in some cases a small multiple of this) level, and is 
likely to extend the speed range to 10°” seconds per elemen- 
tary logical action, or better. Other devices, which I will not 


discuss here, are likely to carry us still farther—I expect that 




CHARACTERISTICS OF MODERN DIGITAL MACHINES 


before another decade passes we will have reached the level 


of 10-8 to 10°? seconds. 


Number of Active Components Required 


The number of active organs in a large modern machine 
varies, according to type, from, say, 3,000 to, say, 30,000. 
Within this, the basic (arithmetical) operations are usually 
performed by one subassembly (or, rather, by one, more or 
less merged, group of subassemblies), the “arithmetical 
organ.” In a large modern machine this organ consists, ac- 
cording to type, of approximately z00 to 2,000 active 
organs. 

As will appear further below, certain aggregates of active 
organs are used to perform some memory functions. These 
comprise, typically, 200 to 2,000 active organs. 

Finally the (properly) “memory” aggregates (cf: below) 
require ancillary subassemblies of active organs, to service 
and administer them. For the fastest memory group that 
does not consist of active organs (cf: below; in the terminol- 
ogy used there, this is the second level of the memory 
hierarchy), this function may require about 300 to 2,000 
active organs. For all parts of the memory together, the 
corresponding requirements of ancillary active organs may 


amount to as much as 50 per cent of the entire machine. 




THE COMPUTER 


Memory Organs. Access Times and Memory Capacities 


The memory organs belong to several different classes. The 
characteristic by which they are classified is the “access 
time.” The access time is defined as follows. First: the time 
required to store a number which is already present in some 
other part of the machine (usually in a register of active 
organs, cf. below) —removing the number that the memory 
organ may have been storing before. Second: the time re- 
quired to “repeat” the number stored—upon “question- 
ing”—to another part of the machine, which can accept it 
(usually to a register of active organs, cf. below). It may be 
convenient to distinguish between these two access times 
(“in” and “out”), or to usea single one, the larger of the two, 
or, possibly, their average. Also, the access time may or may 
not vary from occasion to occasion—if it does not depend on 
the memory address, it is called “random access.” Even if it is 
variable, a single value may be used, the maximum, or 
possibly the average, access time. (The latter may, of course, 
depend on the statistical properties of the problems to be 
solved.) At any rate, I will use here, for the sake of simplicity, 


a single access time. 


Memory Registers Built from Active Organs 


Memory registers can be built out of active organs (cf. 
above). These have the shortest access time, and are the 


most expensive. Such a register is, together with its access 




CHARACTERISTICS OF MODERN DIGITAL MACHINES 


facilities, a circuit of at least four vacuum tubes (or, alter- 
natively, not significantly fewer solid state devices) per bi- 
nary digit (or for a sign), hence, at least four times the 
number per decimal digit (cf. above). Thus the twelve- 
decimal digit (and sign) number system, referred to earlier, 
would normally require in these terms a 196-tube register. 
On the other hand, such registers have access times of one 
or two elementary reaction times—which is very fast when 
compared to other possibilities (cf. below). Also, several 
registers of this type can be integrated with certain econo- 
mies in equipment; they are needed in any case as “in” and 
“out” access organs for other types of memories; one or 
two (in some designs even three) of them are needed as 
parts of the arithmetic organ. To sum up: in moderate num- 
bers they are more economical than one might at first ex- 
pect, and they are, to that extent, also necessary as subordi- 
nate parts of other organs of the machine. However, they do 
not seem to be suited to furnish the large capacity memo- 
ries that are needed in nearly all large computing machines. 
(This last observation applies only to modern machines, i.e. 
those of the vacuum-tube epoch and after. Before that, in 
relay machines—cf: above—relays were used as active organs, 
and relay registers were used as the main form of memory. 
Hence the discussion that follows, too, is to be understood 


as referring to modern machines only.) 




THE COMPUTER 


The Hierarchic Principle for Memory Organs 


For these extensive memory capacities, then, other types of 
memory must be used. At this point the “hierarchy” princi- 
ple of memory intervenes. The significance of this principle 
is the following: 

For its proper functioning—to solve the problems for 
which it is intended—a machine may need a capacity of a 
certain number, say N words, at a certain access time, say t. 
Now it may be technologically difficult, or—which is the 
way in which such difficulties usually manifest them- 
selves—very expensive, to provide N words with access 
time t. However, it may not be necessary to have all the N 
words at this access time. It may well be that a considerably 
smaller number, say N’, is needed at the access time t. Fur- 
thermore, it may be that—once N’ words at access time t are 
provided—the entire capacity of N words is only needed at a 
longer access time t’. Continuing in this direction, it may 
further happen that it is most economical to provide certain 
intermediate capacities in addition to the above—capacities 
of fewer than N but more than N’ words, at access times 
which are longer than t but shorter than t”. The most gen- 
eral scheme in this regard is to provide a sequence of capac- 
ities N,,N,,...,N,,,N, and of access timest,,t,,..-,t.4, t, 
so that these capacities get more exacting and the access 
times less exacting as a sequence progresses—i.e. N, < N, < 


soe < Ni, <N, andt, <t, <+++<t,, <t,—so that N, words are 




CHARACTERISTICS OF MODERN DIGITAL MACHINES 


required at access time t, for eachi = 1, 2, +++, k-1,k. (In 
order to adjust this to what was said previously, one must 
assume that N, = N’, t, = t, and N, =N, t, = t”.) In this 
scheme, each value of i represents one level in the hierarchy 


of memories, and the hierarchy has k such levels. 


Memory Components; Questions of Access 


In a large-scale, modern, high-speed computing machine, 
a complete count of all levels of the memory hierarchy will 
disclose at least three and possibly four or five such levels. 

The first level always corresponds to the registers men- 
tioned above. Their number, N,, is in almost any machine 
design at least three and sometimes higher—numbers as 
high as twenty have occasionally been proposed. The access 
time, t,, is the basic switching time of the machine (or 
possibly twice that time). 

The next (second) level in the hierarchy is always achieved 
with the help of specific memory organs. These are different 
from the switching organs used in the rest of the machine 
(and in the first level of the hierarchy, cf. above). The mem- 
ory organs now in use for this level usually have memory 
capacities, N,, ranging from a few thousand words to as 
muchas a few tens of thousands (sizes of the latter kind are at 
present still in the design stage). The access time, t,, is 
usually five to ten times longer than the one of the previous 


level, t,. Further levels usually correspond to an increase in 




THE COMPUTER 


memory capacity, N,, by some factor like 10 at each step. The 
access times, t,, increase even faster, but here other limiting 
and qualifying rules regarding the access time also intervene 
(cf. below). A detailed discussion of this subject would call 
for a degree of detail that does not seem warranted at this 
time. 

The fastest components, which are specifically memory 
organs (i.e. not active organs, cf. above), are certain elec- 
trostatic devices and magnetic core arrays. The use of the 
latter seems to be definitely on the ascendant, although 
other techniques (electrostatic, ferro-electric, etc.), may 
also re-enter or enter the picture. For the later levels of the 
memory hierarchy, magnetic drums and magnetic tapes are 
at present mostly in use; magnetic discs have been sug- 


gested and occasionally explored. 


Complexities of the Concept of Access Time 


The three last-mentioned devices are all subject to special 
access rules and limitations: a magnetic drum memory pre- 
sents all its parts successively and cyclically for access; the 
memory capacity of a tape is practically unlimited, but it 
presents its parts in a fixed linear succession, which can be 
stopped and reversed when desired; all these schemes can 
be combined with various arrangements that provide for 
special synchronisms between the machine’s functioning 


and the fixed memory sequences. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF MODERN DIGITAL MACHINES 


The very last stage of any memory hierarchy is necessarily 
the outside world—that is, the outside world as far as the 
machine is concerned, i.e. that part of it with which the 
machine can directly communicate, in other words the in- 
put and the output organs of the machine. These are usually 
punched paper tapes or cards, and on the output side, of 
course, also printed paper. Sometimes a magnetic tape is the 
ultimate input-output system of the machine, and its trans- 
lation onto a medium that a human can directly use—i.e. 
punched or printed paper—is performed apart from the 
machine. 

The following are some access times in absolute terms: 
For existing ferromagnetic core memories, 5 to 15 micro- 
seconds; for electrostatic memories, 8 to 20 microseconds; 
for magnetic drums, 2,500 to 20,000 rpm., i.e. a revolu- 
tion per 24 to 3 milliseconds—in this time 1 to 2,000 words 
may get fed; for magnetic tapes, speeds up to 70,000 lines 
per second, ie. a line in 14 microseconds; a word may 


consist of 5 to 1¢ lines. 


The Principle of Direct Addressing 


All existing machines and memories use “direct address- 
ing,’ which is to say that every word in the memory has a 
numerical address of its own that characterizes it and its 
position within the memory (the total aggregate of all hier- 


archic levels) uniquely. This numerical address is always 




THE COMPUTER 


explicitly specified when the memory word is to be read or 
written. Sometimes not all parts of the memory are accessi- 
ble at the same time (cf: above; there may also be multiple 
memories, not all of which can be acceded to at the same 
time, with certain provisions for access priorities). In this 
case, access to the memory depends on the general state of 
the machine at the moment when access is requested. Nev- 
ertheless, there is never any ambiguity about the address, 


and the place it designates. 




THE BRAIN 


The discussion up to this point has provided the basis for the 
comparison that is the objective of this work. I have de- 
scribed, in some detail, the nature of modern computing 
machines and the broad alternative principles around which 
they can be organized. It is now possible to pass on to the 
other term of the comparison, the human nervous system. I 
will discuss the points of similarity and dissimilarity be- 
tween these two kinds of “automata.” Bringing out the ele- 
ments of similarity leads over well-known territory. There 
are elements of dissimilarity, too, not only in rather obvious 
respects of size and speed but also in certain much deeper- 
lying areas: These involve the principles of functioning and 
control, of over-all organization, etc. My primary aim is to 
develop some of these. However, in order to appreciate them 
properly, a juxtaposition and combination with the points of 
similarity, as well as with those of more superficial dis- 
similarity (size, speed; cf. above) are also required. Hence 
the discussion must place considerable emphasis on these, 


too. 




THE BRAIN 


Simplified Description of the 
Function of the Neuron 


The most immediate observation regarding the nervous 
system is that its functioning is prima facie digital. It is neces- 
sary to discuss this fact, and the structures and functions on 
which its assertion is based, somewhat more fully. 

The basic component of this system is the nerve cell, the 
neuron, and the normal function of a neuron is to generate 
and to propagate a nerve impulse. This impulse is a rather 
complex process, which has a variety of aspects—electrical, 
chemical, and mechanical. It seems, nevertheless, to be a 
reasonably uniquely defined process, i.e. nearly the same 
under all conditions; it represents an essentially reproduc- 
ible, unitary response to a rather wide variety of stimuli. 

Let me discuss this—i.e. those aspects of the nerve im- 
pulse that seem to be the relevant ones in the present con- 


text—in somewhat more detail. 


The Nature of the Nerve Impulse 


The nerve cell consists of a body from which originate, di- 
rectly or indirectly, one or more branches. Such a branch is 
called an axon of the cell. The nerve impulse is a continuous 
change, propagated—usually at a fixed speed, which may, 
however, be a function of the nerve cell involved—along the 


(or rather, along each) axon. As mentioned above, this con- 




THE NATURE OF THE NERVE IMPULSE 


dition can be viewed under multiple aspects. One of its 
characteristics is certainly that it is an electrical disturbance; 
in fact, itis most frequently described as being just that. This 
disturbance is usually an electrical potential of something 
like 50 millivolts and of about a millisecond’s duration. 
Concurrently with this electrical disturbance there also oc- 
cur chemical changes along the axon. Thus, in the area of the 
axon over which the pulse-potential is passing, the ionic 
constitution of the intracellular fluid changes, and so do the 
electrical-chemical properties (conductivity, permeability) 
of the wall of the axon, the membrane. At the endings of the 
axon the chemical character of the change is even more 
obvious; there, specific and characteristic substances make 
their appearance when the pulse arrives. Finally, there are 
probably mechanical changes as well. Indeed, it is very likely 
that the changes of the various ionic permeabilities of the 
cell membrane (cf. above) can come about only by reorien- 
tation of its molecules, i.e. by mechanical changes involving 
the relative positions of these constituents. 

It should be added that all these changes are reversible. In 
other words, when the impulse has passed, all conditions 
along the axon, and all its constituent parts, resume their 
original states. 

Since all these effects occur on a molecular scale—the 
thickness of the cell membrane is of the order of a few tenth- 
microns (i.e. 10° cm.), which is a molecular dimension for 


the large organic molecules that are involved here—the 


AL 


THE BRAIN 


above distinctions between electrical, chemical, and me- 
chanical effects are not so definite as it might first appear. 
Indeed, on the molecular scale there are no sharp distinc- 
tions between all these kinds of changes: every chemical 
change is induced by a change in intramolecular forces 
which determine changed relative positions of the mole- 
cules, i.e. it is mechanically induced. Furthermore, every 
such intramolecular mechanical change alters the electrical 
properties of the molecule involved, and therefore induces 
changed electrical properties and changed relative electrical 
potential levels. To sum up: on the usual (macroscopic) 
scale, electrical, chemical, and mechanical processes repre- 
sent alternatives between which sharp distinctions can be 
maintained. However, on the near-molecule level of the 
nerve membrane, all these aspects tend to merge. It is, there- 
fore, not surprising that the nerve impulse turns out to be a 


phenomenon which can be viewed under any one of them. 


The Process of Stimulation 


As I mentioned before, the fully developed nerve impulses 
are comparable, no matter how induced. Because their 
character is not an unambiguously defined one (it may be 
viewed electrically as well as chemically, cf. above), its in- 
duction, too, can be alternatively attributed to electrical or 
to chemical causes. Within the nervous system, however, it 


is mostly due to one or more other nerve impulses. Under 




THE NATURE OF THE NERVE IMPULSE 


such conditions, the process of its induction—the stimulation 
of a nerve impulse—may or may not succeed. If it fails, a 
passing disturbance arises at first, but after a few millisec- 
onds, this dies out. Then no disturbances propagate along 
the axon. If it succeeds, the disturbance very soon assumes a 
(nearly) standard form, and in this form it spreads along 
the axon. That is to say, as mentioned above, a standard 
nerve impulse will then move along the axon, and its ap- 
pearance will be reasonably independent of the details of 
the process that induced it. 

The stimulation of the nerve impulse occurs normally in 
or near the body of the nerve cell. Its propagation, as dis- 


cussed above, occurs along the axon. 


The Mechanism of Stimulating Pulses by Pulses; 
Its Digital Character 


T can now return to the digital character of this mechanism. 
The nervous pulses can clearly be viewed as (two-valued) 
markers, in the sense discussed previously: the absence of a 
pulse then represents one value (say, the binary digit 0), and 
the presence of one represents the other (say, the binary 
digit 1). This must, of course, be interpreted as an occur- 
rence on a specific axon (or, rather, on all the axons of a 
specific neuron), and possibly in a specific time relation to 
other events. It is, then, to be interpreted as a marker (a 


binary digit o or 1) ina specific, logical role. 




THE BRAIN 


As mentioned above, pulses (which appear on the axons 
of a given neuron) are usually stimulated by other pulses 
that are impinging on the body of the neuron. This stimula- 
tion is, asarule, conditional, i.e. only certain combinations 
and synchronisms of such primary pulses stimulate the sec- 
ondary pulse in question—all others will fail to so stimulate. 
That is, the neuron is an organ which accepts and emits 
definite physical entities, the pulses. Upon receipt of pulses 
in certain combinations and synchronisms it will be stimu- 
lated to emit a pulse of its own, otherwise it will not emit. 
The rules which describe to which groups of pulses it will 
so respond are the rules that govern it as an active organ. 

This is clearly the description of the functioning of an 
organ in a digital machine, and of the way in which the role 
and function of a digital organ has to be characterized. It 
therefore justifies the original assertion, that the nervous 
system has a prima facie digital character. 

Let me add a few words regarding the qualifying “prima 
facie.” The above description contains some idealizations 
and simplifications, which will be discussed subsequently. 
Once these are taken into account, the digital character no 
longer stands out quite so clearly and unequivocally. Nev- 
ertheless, the traits emphasized in the above are the pri- 
marily conspicuous ones. It seems proper, therefore, to be- 
gin the discussion as I did here, by stressing the digital 


character of the nervous system. 




THE NATURE OF THE NERVE IMPULSE 


Time Characteristics of Nerve Response, Fatigue, and Recovery 


Before going into this, however, some orienting remarks on 
the size, energy requirements, and speed of the nerve cell 
are in order. These will be particularly illuminating when 
stated in terms of comparisons with the main “artificial” 
competitors: The typical active organs of modern logical 
and computing machines. These are, of course, the vacuum 
tube and (more recently) the transistor. 

I stated above that the stimulation of the nerve cell occurs 
normally on or near its body. Actually, a perfectly normal 
stimulation is possible along an axon, too. That is, an ade- 
quate electrical potential or a suitable chemical stimulant in 
adequate concentration, when applied ata point of the axon, 
will start there a disturbance which soon develops into a 
standard pulse, traveling both up and down the axon, from 
the point stimulated. Indeed, the “usual” stimulation de- 
scribed above mostly takes place on a set of branches extend- 
ing from the body of the cell for a short distance, which, 
apart from their smaller dimensions, are essentially axons 
themselves, and it propagates from these to the body of the 
nerve cell (and then to the regular axons). By the way, these 
stimulation-receptors are called dendrites. The normal stim- 
ulation, when it comes from another pulse (or pulses) ema- 
nates from a special ending of the axon (or axons) that 
propagated the pulse in question. This ending is called a 


synapse. (Whether a pulse can stimulate only through a syn- 




THE BRAIN 


apse, or whether, in traveling along an axon, it can stimulate 
directly another, exceptionally close-lying axon, is a ques- 
tion that need not be discussed here. The appearances are in 
favor of assuming that such a short-circuited process is pos- 
sible.) The time of trans-synaptic stimulation amounts to a 
few times 10 seconds, this time being defined as the dura- 
tion between the arrival of a pulse at a synapse and the 
appearance of the stimulated pulse on the nearest point of an 
axon of the stimulated neuron. However, this is not the most 
significant way to define the reaction time of aneuron, when 
viewed as an active organ in a logical machine. The reason 
for this is that immediately after the stimulated pulse has 
become evident, the stimulated neuron has not yet reverted 
to its original, prestimulation condition. It is fatigued, i.e. it 
could not immediately accept stimulation by another pulse 
and respond in the standard way. From the point of view of 
machine economy, it is a more important measure of speed 
to state after how much time a stimulation that induced a 
standard response can be followed by another stimulation 
that will also induce a standard response. This duration is 
about 1.5 times 10°? seconds. It is clear from these figures 
that only one or two per cent of this time is needed for the 
actual trans-synaptic stimulation, the remainder represent- 
ing recovery time, during which the neuron returns from its 
fatigued, immediate post-stimulation condition to its nor- 
mal, prestimulation one. It should be noted that this recov- 


ery from fatigue is a gradual one—already at a certain earlier 




THE NATURE OF THE NERVE IMPULSE 


time (after about .5 times 10-* seconds) the neuron can 
respond in a nonstandard way, namely it will produce a 
standard pulse, but only in response to a stimulus which is 
significantly stronger than the one needed under standard 
conditions. This circumstance has somewhat broad signifi- 
cance, and I will come back to it later on. 

Thus the reaction time of a neuron is, depending on how 
one defines it, somewhere between 10~* and 10~ seconds, 
but the more significant definition is the latter one. Com- 
pared to this, modern vacuum tubes and transistors can be 
used in large logical machines at reaction times between 10° 
and 107’ seconds. (Of course, Iam allowing here, too, for the 
complete recovery time; the organ in question is, after this 
duration, back to its prestimulation condition.) That is, our 
artifacts are, in this regard, well ahead of the corresponding 
natural components, by factors like 104 to 10°. 

With respect to size, matters have a rather different as- 
pect. There are various ways to evaluate size, and it is best to 


take these up one by one. 


Size of a Neuron. Comparisons with Artificial Components 


The linear size of a neuron varies widely from one nerve cell 
to the other, since some of these cells are contained in closely 
integrated large aggregates and have, therefore, very short 
axons, while others conduct pulses between rather remote 


parts of the body and may, therefore, have linear extensions 




THE BRAIN 


comparable to those of the entire human body. One way to 
obtain an unambiguous and significant comparison is to 
compare the logically active part of the nerve cell with that of 
a vacuum tube, or transistor. For the former this is the cell 
membrane, whose thickness as mentioned before is of the 
order of a few times 10~° cm. For the latter it is as follows: in 
the case of the vacuum tube, it is the grid-to-cathode dis- 
tance, which varies from 107! to a few times 107 cm.; in 
the case of the transistor, it is the distance between the so- 
called “whisker electrodes” (the non-ohmic electrodes—the 
“emitter” and the “control-electrode”), about 3 folded in 
order to account for the immediate, active environment of 
these subcomponents, and this amounts to somewhat less 
than 107% cm. Thus, with regard to linear size, the natural 
components seem to lead our artifacts by a factor like 10°. 

Next, a comparison with respect to volume is possible. 
The central nervous system occupies a space of the order 
magnitude of a liter (in the brain), ie. of 10? cm.> The 
number of neurons contained in this system is usually esti- 
mated to be of the order of 10'°, or somewhat higher. This 
would allow about 107’ cm.? per neuron. 

The density with which vacuum tubes or transistors can 
be packed can also be estimated—although not with abso- 
lute unambiguity. It seems clear that this packing density is 
(on either side of the comparison) a better measure of size 
efficiency than the actual volume of a single component. 


With present-day techniques, aggregates of a few thousand 




THE NATURE OF THE NERVE IMPULSE 


vacuum tubes will certainly occupy several times 10 ft.*; for 
transistors the same may be achieved, in something like 
one, or a few, ft.* Using the figure of the latter order as a 
measure of the best that can be done today, one obtains 
something like 10° cm.? for a few times 10° active organs, 
i.e. about 10 to 10° cm.? per active organ. Thus the natural 
components lead the artificial ones with respect to volume 
requirements by factors like 10° to 10°. In comparing this 
with the estimates for the linear size, it is probably best to 
consider the linear size-factor as being on one footing with 
the cube root of the volume-factor. The cube root of the 
above 108 to 10° is .5 to 1 times 10%. This is in good accord 


with the ro? arrived at above by a direct method. 


Energy Dissipation. Comparisons with Artificial Components 


Finally, a comparison can be made with respect to energy 
consumption. As active logical organ does not, by its na- 
ture, do any work: the stimulated pulse that it produces 
need not have more energy than the prorated fraction of the 
pulses which stimulate it—and in any case there is no in- 
trinsic and necessary relationship between these energies. 
Consequently, the energy involved is almost entirely dissi- 
pated, i.e. converted into heat without doing relevant me- 
chanical work. Thus the energy consumed is actually en- 
ergy dissipated, and one might as well talk about the energy 


dissipation of such organs. 




THE BRAIN 


The energy dissipation in the human central nervous sys- 
tem (in the brain) is of the order of 10 watts. Since, as 
pointed out above, the order of 10!° neurons are involved 
here, this means a dissipation of 10-° watts per neuron. The 
typical dissipation of'a vacuum tube is of the order of 5 to 10 
watts. The typical dissipation of'a transistor may be as little as 
1o7! watts. Thus the natural components lead the artificial 
ones with respect to dissipation by factors like 10® to 10°— 
the same factors that appeared above with respect to volume 


requirements. 


Summary of Comparisons 


Summing up all of this, it appears that the relevant 
comparison-factor with regard to size is about 10* to 10? in 
favor of the natural componentry versus the artificial one. This 
factor is obtained from the cube of a linear comparison, as 
well as by a volume-comparison and an energy-dissipation 
comparison. Against this there is a factor of about 10* to 10° 
on speed in favor of the artificial componentry versus the 
natural one. 

On these quantitative evaluations certain conclusions can 
be based. It must be remembered, of course, that the dis- 
cussion is still moving very near to the surface, so that 
conclusions arrived at at this stage are very much subject to 
revision in the light of the further progress of the discus- 
sion. It seems nevertheless worth while to formulate certain 


conclusions at this point. They are the following ones. 




THE NATURE OF THE NERVE IMPULSE 


First: in terms of the number of actions that can be per- 
formed by active organs of the same total size (defined by 
volume or by energy dissipation) in the same interval, the 
natural componentry is a factor 10* ahead of the artificial 
one. This is the quotient of the two factors obtained above, 
i.e. of 108 to 10? by 10% to 10°. 

Second: the same factors show that the natural compo- 
nentry favors automata with more, but slower, organs, 
while the artificial one favors the reverse arrangement of 
fewer, but faster, organs. Hence it is to be expected that an 
efficiently organized large natural automation (like the hu- 
man nervous system) will tend to pick up as many logical 
(or informational) items as possible simultaneously, and 
process them simultaneously, while an efficiently organized 
large artificial automation (like a large modern computing 
machine) will be more likely to do things successively— 
one thing at a time, or at any rate not so many things at a 
time. That is, large and efficient natural automata are likely to 
be highly parallel, while large and efficient artificial automata 
will tend to be less so, and rather to be serial. (Cf. some earlier 
remarks on parallel versus serial arrangements.) 

Third: it should be noted, however, that parallel and se- 
rial operation are not unrestrictedly substitutable for each 
other—as would be required to make the first remark above 
completely valid, with its simple scheme of dividing the 
size-advantage factor by the speed-disadvantage factor in 


order to get a single (efficiency) “figure of merit.” More 




THE BRAIN 


specifically, not everything serial can be immediately paral- 
leled—certain operations can only be performed after cer- 
tain others, and not simultaneously with them (i.e. they 
must use the results of the latter). In such a case, the transi- 
tion from a serial scheme to a parallel one may be impossi- 
ble, or it may be possible but only concurrently with a 
change in the logical approach and organization of the pro- 
cedure. Conversely, the desire to serialize a parallel pro- 
cedure may impose new requirements on the automaton. 
Specifically, it will almost always create new memory re- 
quirements, since the results of the operations that are per- 
formed first must be stored while the operations that come 
after these are performed. Hence the logical approach and 
structure in natural automata may be expected to differ 
widely from those in artificial automata. Also, it is likely 
that the memory requirements of the latter will turn out to 
be systematically more severe than those of the former. 

All these viewpoints will reappear in the discussions that 


are to follow. 


Stimulation Criteria 


The Simplest—Elementary Logical 


I can now turn to the discussion of the idealizations and sim- 


plifications contained in the description of nerve-action as it 




STIMULATION CRITERIA 


was given further above. I pointed out there that these existed 
and that their implications are not at all trivial to evaluate. 

As pointed out before, the normal output of a neuron is 
the standard nerve pulse. This can be induced by various 
forms of stimulation, including the arrival of one or more 
pulses from other neurons. Other possible stimulators are 
phenomena in the outside world to which a particular neu- 
ron is specifically sensitive (light, sound, pressure, temper- 
ature), and physical and chemical changes within the or- 
ganism at the point where the neuron is situated. I will 
begin by considering the first-mentioned form of stimula- 
tion—that by other nerve pulses. 

I observed before that this particular mechanism—the 
stimulation of nerve pulses by suitable combinations of 
other nerve pulses—makes the neuron comparable to the 
typical basic, digital, active organ. To elaborate this further: 
if a neuron is contacted (by way of their synapses) by the 
axons of two other neurons, and if its minimum stimula- 
tion requirement (in order to evoke a response pulse) is that 
of two (simultaneous) incoming pulses, then this neuron is 
in fact an “and” organ: it performs the logical operation of 
conjunction (verbalized by “and”), since it responds only 
when both its stimulators are (simultaneously) active. If, on 
the other hand, the minimum requirement is merely the 
arrival (at least) of one pulse, the neuron is an “or” organ— 


i.e. it performs the logical operation of disjunction (ver- 




THE BRAIN 


balized by “or”), since it responds when either of its two 
stimulators is active. 

“And” and “or” are the basic operations of logic. To- 
gether with “no” (the logical operation of negation) they 
are a complete set of basic logical operations—all other 
logical operations, no matter how complex, can be ob- 
tained by suitable combinations of these. I will not discuss 
here how neurons can simulate the operation “no” too, or 
by what tricks the use of this operation can be avoided 
altogether. The above should suffice to make clear what I 
have already emphasized earlier, that the neurons appear, 
when thus viewed, as the basic logical organs—and hence 


also as the basic digital organs. 


More Complicated Stimulation Criteria 


This, however, is a simplification and idealization of reality. 
The actual neurons are, as a rule, not so simply organized 
with respect to their position in the system. 

Some neurons do indeed have only one or two—or at any 
rate a few, easily enumerated—synapses of other neurons on 
their body. However, the more frequent situation is that the 
body of a neuron has synapses with axons of many other 
neurons. It even appears that, occasionally, several axons 
from one neuron form synapses on another. Thus the possi- 
ble stimulators are many, and the patterns of stimulation that 


may be effective have more complicated definitions than the 




STIMULATION CRITERIA 


simple “and” and “or” schemes described above. If there are 
many synapses on a single nerve cell, the simplest rule of 
behavior for the latter will be to respond only when it 
receives a certain minimum number of (simultaneous) 
nerve pulses (or more). However, there is some plausibility 
in assuming that things can, in reality, be even more compli- 
cated than this. It may well be that certain nerve pulse com- 
binations will stimulate a given neuron not simply by virtue 
of their number but also by virtue of the spatial relations of 
the synapses to which they arrive. That is, one may have to 
face situations in which there are, say, hundreds of synapses 
on a single nerve cell, and the combinations of stimulations 
on these that are effective (that generate a response pulse in 
the last-mentioned neuron) are characterized not only by 
their number but also by their coverage of certain special 
regions on that neuron (on its body or on its dendrite 
system, cf. above), by the spatial relations of such regions to 
each other, and by even more complicated quantitative and 


geometrical relationships that might be relevant. 


The Threshold 


If the criterion of effectiveness of stimulation is the simplest 
one mentioned above: the (simultaneous) presence of a 
minimum number of stimulating pulses, this minimum- 
required stimulation is called the threshold of the neuron in 


question. It is customary to talk of the stimulation require- 




THE BRAIN 


ments of a given neuron in terms of this criterion, i.e. of its 
threshold. It must be remembered, however, that it is by no 
means established that the stimulation requirement has this 
simple character—it may turn around much more compli- 
cated relationships than the mere attainment of a threshold 
(i.e. of a minimum number of simultaneous stimulations), 


as discussed above. 


The Summation Time 


Apart from these, the properties of a neuron may exhibit 
other complexities which are not described by the mere 
stimulus-response relationship in terms of standard nerve 
pulses. 

Thus wherever “simultaneity” is mentioned in the above, 
it cannot and does not mean actual, exact simultaneity. In 
each case there is a finite period of grace, a summation time, 
such that two pulses arriving within such a time period still 
act as if they had been simultaneous. Actually, things may be 
even more complicated than this—the summation time may 
not bea sharp concept. Even after a slightly longer time, the 
previous pulse may still be summed to the subsequent one, 
toa gradually decreasing, partial extent; sequences of pulses, 
further apart (within limits) than the summation time 
might, by virtue of their length, have more than the individ- 
ual effect; various superpositions of the phenomena of fa- 


tigue and recovery may put a neuron into abnormal states, 




STIMULATION CRITERIA 


i.e. such where its response characteristics are different from 
what they are in the standard condition. On all these matters 
certain (more or less incomplete) bodies of observation 
exist, and they all indicate that the individual neuron may 
be—at least in suitable special situations—a much more 
complicated mechanism than the dogmatic description in 
terms of stimulus-response, following the simple pattern of 


elementary logical operations, can express. 


Stimulation Criteria for Receptors 


Only a few things need be said (in the particular, present 
context) about the stimulation of neurons by factors other 
than the outputs (nerve pulses) of other neurons. As dis- 
cussed earlier, such factors are phenomena in the outside 
world (i.e. on the surface of the organism) to which the 
neuron in question is specifically sensitive (light, sound, 
pressure, temperature) and also physical and chemical 
changes within the organism at the point where the neuron 
is situated. Neurons whose organizational function is to 
respond to the first class of stimuli are commonly called 
receptors. However, it may be better to call all neurons which 
are organizationally meant to respond to stimuli other than 
nerve pulses receptors, and discriminate between the first and 
the second category by specifying them as external or internal 
receptors. 


With respect to all of these, the question of a stimulation 




THE BRAIN 


criterion again arises—of a criterion defining under what 
conditions stimulation of a nerve pulse will take place. 

The simplest stimulation criterion is again one that can be 
stated in terms of a threshold—just as it was in the previously 
considered case of the stimulation of a neuron by nerve 
pulses. This means that the criterion of effectiveness of stim- 
ulation can be stated in terms of a minimum intensity of the 
stimulating agent—i.e. a minimum intensity of illumina- 
tion, of sonic energy contained in a certain frequency inter- 
val, of overpressure, of rise in temperature, respectively, for 
an external receptor; or a minimum change in the con- 
centration of the critical chemical agent, or a minimum 
change in the value of the relevant physical parameter, in the 
case of an internal receptor. 

It should be noted, however, that the threshold-type 
stimulation criterion is not the only possible one. Thus in 
the optical case, it appears that many of the neurons in- 
volved respond to a change of illumination (in some cases 
from light to dark, in others from dark to light), rather than 
to the attainment of a specific level of illumination. It could 
be that these are reactions not of a single neuron but of the 
neuronic output of more complicated neuron systems. I 
will not go into this question here. It suffices to observe that 
the available evidence tends to indicate that in the case of 
receptors, too, the threshold-type stimulation criterion is 
not the only one used in the nervous system. 


Let me, then, repeat the above-mentioned, typical exam- 




STIMULATION CRITERIA 


ple. It is well known that in the optic nerve certain fibers 
respond not to any particular (minimum) level of illumina- 
tion but only to changes of this level, e.g. in certain fibers it 
is the passage from darkness to light, in others, the passage 
from light to darkness which causes responses. In other 
words, it is increases or decreases of the level in question, 
ie. the size of its derivative and not its own size, which 
furnish the stimulation criterion. 

It would appear to be proper now to say a few things about 
the role of these “complexities” of the nervous system in its 
functional structure and its functioning. For one thing, it is 
quite conceivable that these complexities play no useful 
functional role at all. Itis, however, more interesting to point 
out that they might conceivably have such roles and that a 
few things can be said about these possibilities. 

It is conceivable that in the essentially digitally-organized 
nervous system the complexities referred to play an analog 
or at least a “mixed” role. It has been suggested that by such 
mechanisms more recondite over-all electrical effects might 
influence the functioning of the nervous system. It could be 
that in this way certain general electrical potentials play an 
important role and that the system responds to the solutions 
of potential theoretical problems in toto, problems which 
are less immediate and elementary than what one normally 
describes by the digital criteria, stimulation criteria, etc. 
Since the character of the nervous system nevertheless prob- 


ably is primarily digital, such effects, ifreal, would probably 




THE BRAIN 


interact with digital effects, i.e. it would be a question of a 
“mixed system” rather than of a genuine analog one. Spec- 
ulations in these directions have been indulged in by several 
authors; it seems quite adequate to refer with respect to 
them to the general literature. I will not discuss them any 
further, in specific terms, here. 

It should be said, however, that all complications of this 
type mean, in terms of the counting of basic active organs as 
we have practiced it so far, that a nerve cell is more than a 
single basic active organ, and that any significant effort at 
counting has to recognize this. Obviously, even the more 
complicated stimulation criteria have this effect. If the nerve 
cell is activated by the stimulation of certain combinations of 
synapses on its body and not by others, then the significant 
count of basic active organs must presumably be a count of 
synapses rather than of nerve cells. If the situation is further 
refined by the appearance of the “mixed” phenomena re- 
ferred to above, these counts get even more difficult. Already 
the necessity of replacing the nerve cell count by a synapsis 
count may increase the number of basic active organs by a 
considerable factor, like 10 to 100. This, and similar circum- 
stances, ought to be borne in mind in connection with the 
basic active organ counts referred to so far. 

Thus all the complexities referred to here may be irrele- 
vant, but they may also endow the system with a (partial) 
analog character, or with a “mixed” character. In any case, 


they increase the count of basic active organs, if this count is 




THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY WITHIN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


to be effected by any significant criteria. This increment 


may well be by a factor like 10 to 100. 


The Problem of Memory within the Nervous System 


The discussions up to this point have not taken into account a 
component whose presence in the nervous system is highly 
plausible, if not certain—if for no other reason than that it has 
played a vital role in all artificial computing machines con- 
structed to date, and its significance is, therefore, probably a 
matter of principle rather than of accident. I mean the memory. 
I will, therefore, turn now to the discussion of this compo- 
nent, or rather subassembly, of the nervous system. 

As stated above, the presence of a memory—or, not im- 
probably, of several memories—within the nervous system 
is a matter of surmise and postulation, but one that all 
experience with artificial computing automata suggests and 
confirms. It is just as well to admit right at the start that all 
physical assertions about the nature, embodiment, and loca- 
tion of this subassembly, or subassemblies, are equally hypo- 
thetical. We do not know where in the physically viewed 
nervous system a memory resides; we do not know whether 
it is a separate organ or a collection of specific parts of other 
already known organs, etc. It may well be residing in a 
system of specific nerves, which would then have to be a 
rather large system. It may well have something to do with 


the genetic mechanism of the body. We are as ignorant of its 




THE BRAIN 


nature and position as were the Greeks, who suspected the 
location of the mind in the diaphragm. The only thing we 
know is that it must be a rather large-capacity memory, and 
that it is hard to see how a complicated automaton like the 


human nervous system could do without one. 


Principles for Estimating the Capacity of the 


Memory in the Nervous System 


Let me now say a few words about the probable capacity of 
this memory. 

In artificial automata, like computing machines, there are 
fairly well agreed on, standard ways to assign a “capacity” to 
a memory, and it would appear to be reasonable to extend 
these to the nervous system as well. A memory can retain a 
certain maximum amount of information, and information 
can always be converted into an aggregation of binary digits, 
“bits.” Thus a memory which can hold a thousand eight- 
place decimal numbers would have to be assigned a capacity 
of 1,000 x 8 x 3.32 bits, since a decimal digit is the equiv- 
alent of approximately log, 10 ~ 3.32 bits (the reasons for 
this method of bookkeeping have been established in the 
classical works on information theory by G. E. Shannon and 
others). It is indeed clear that 3 decimal digits must be the 
equivalent of about 10 bits, since 2!° = 1,024 is approx- 
imately equal to 10% = 1,000. (In this way, a decimal digit 


corresponds approximately to 10/3 ~ 3.33 bits.) Thus the 




THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY WITHIN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


above capacity count gives the result of 2.66 x 10+ bits. By a 
similar argument, the information capacity represented by a 
letter of the printed or typewritten alphabet—one such letter 
being a 2 x 26+ 35 = 88-way alternative (the 2 representing 
the possibility of its being upper or lower case, the 26 the 
number of letters of the alphabet, and the 35 the usual 
number of punctuation marks, numerical symbols, and in- 
tervals, which are, of course, also relevant in this context)— 
has to be evaluated at log, 88 ~ 6.45. Hence, e.g.,a memory 
which can hold a thousand such letters has a capacity of 
6,450 = 6.45 x 10° bits. In the same order of ideas, memory 
capacities corresponding to more complicated forms of in- 
formation, like geometrical shapes (of course, given with a 
certain specified degree of precision and resolution), color 
nuances (with the same qualifications as above), etc. can also 
be expressed in terms of standard units, i.e. bits. Memories 
which hold combinations of all these can then be attributed 
capacities resulting from the ones arrived at in conformity 


with the above principles, simply by addition. 


Memory Capacity Estimates with These Stipulations 


The memory capacity required for a modern computing 
machine is usually of the order of 105 to 10° bits. The 
memory capacities to be surmised as necessary for the func- 
tioning of the nervous system would seem to have to be a 


good deal larger than this, since the nervous system as such 




THE BRAIN 


was seen above to be a considerably larger automaton than 
the artificial automata (e.g. computing machines) that we 
know. By how much the surmised memory capacity should 
transcend the above-quoted figure of 10° to 10° is hard to 
tell. However, certain rough orienting estimates can, never- 
theless, be arrived at. 

Thus the standard receptor would seem to accept about 
14 distinct digital impressions per second, which can prob- 
ably be reckoned as the same number of bits. Allowing 10!° 
nerve cells, assuming that each one of them is under suit- 
able conditions essentially an (inner or outer) receptor, a 
total input of 14 x 10!° bits per second results. Assuming 
further, for which there is some evidence, that there is no 
true forgetting in the nervous system—that impressions 
once received may be removed from the important area of 
nervous activity, i.e. from the center of attention, but not 
truly erased—an estimate for the entirety of a normal hu- 
man lifetime can be made. Putting the latter equal to, say, 60 
years ~ 2 x 10° seconds, the input over an entire lifetime, 
i.e. with the above stipulations, the total required memory 
capacity would turn out to be 14 x 10!° x 2 x 10? = 2.8 x 
10° bits. This is larger than the figure of 10° to 10°, recog- 
nized as typically valid for a modern computing machine, 
but the excess of this number over its computing machine 
equivalent would not seem to be unreasonably larger than 
the corresponding excess that we have already observed 


earlier for the respective numbers of basic active organs. 




THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY WITHIN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


Various Possible Physical Embodiments of the Memory 


The question of the physical embodiment of this memory 
remains. For this, various authors have suggested a variety 
of solutions. It has been proposed to assume that the thresh- 
olds—or, more broadly stated, the stimulation criteria—for 
various nerve cells change with time as functions of the 
previous history of that cell. Thus frequent use of a nerve 
cell might lower its threshold, i.e. ease the requirements of 
its stimulation, and the like. If this were true, the memory 
would reside in the variability of the stimulation criteria. It 
is certainly a possibility, but I will not attempt to discuss it 
here. 

A still more drastic embodiment of the same idea would 
be achieved by assuming that the very connections of the 
nerve cells, i.e. the distribution of conducting axons, vary 
with time. This would mean that the following state of 
things could exist. Conceivably, persistent disuse of an axon 
might make it ineffective for later use. On the other hand, 
very frequent (more than normal) use might give the con- 
nection that it represents a lower threshold (a facilitated 
stimulation criterion) over that particular path. In this case, 
again, certain parts of the nervous system would be variable 
in time and with previous history and would, thus, in and 
by themselves represent a memory. 

Another form of memory, which is obviously present, is 


the genetic part of the body: the chromosomes and their 




THE BRAIN 


constituent genes are clearly memory elements which by 
their state affect, and to a certain extent determine, the 
functioning of the entire system. Thus there is a possibility 
of a genetic memory system also. 

There are still other forms of memory, some of which 
have a not inconsiderable plausibility. Thus some traits of 
the chemical composition of certain areas in the body 
might be self-perpetuating and also, therefore, possible 
memory elements. One should consider, then, such types 
of memory if one considers the genetic memory system, 
since the self-perpetuating properties residing in the genes 
can apparently also locate themselves outside the genes, in 
the remaining portions of the cell. 

I will not go into all these possibilities and many others 
one could consider with equal—or, in some cases, even 
greater—plausibility. I would like to limit myself here to the 
remark that even without locating the memory in specific 
sets of nerve cells, a wide variety of physical embodiments 
of various degrees of plausibility can be—and have been— 


suggested for it. 


Analogies with Artificial Computing Machines 


Lastly, I would like to mention that systems of nerve cells, 
which stimulate each other in various possible cyclical 
ways, also constitute memories. These would be memories 


made up of active elements (nerve cells). In our computing 




THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY WITHIN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


machine technology such memories are in frequent and 
significant use; in fact, these were actually the first ones to 
be introduced. In vacuum-tube machines the “flip-flops,” 
i.e. pairs of vacuum tubes that are mutually gating and 
controlling each other, represent this type. Transistor tech- 
nology, as well as practically every other form of high-speed 
electronic technology, permit and indeed call for the use of 
flip-floplike subassemblies, and these can be used as mem- 
ory elements in the same way that the flip-flops were in the 


early vacuum-tube computing machines. 


The Underlying Componentry of the Memory Need Not Be 
the Same as That of the Basic Active Organs 


It must be noted, however, that it is a priori unlikely that the 
nervous system should use such devices as the main vehi- 
cles for its memory requirements; such memories, most 
characteristically designated as “memories made up from 
basic active organs,” are, in every sense that matters, ex- 
tremely expensive. Modern computing machine technol- 
ogy started out with such arrangements—thus the first 
large-scale vacuum tube computing machine, the ENIAC, 
relied for its primary (i.e. fastest and most directly avail- 
able) memory on flip-flops exclusively. However, the ENIAC 
had a very large size (22,000 vacuum tubes) and by present- 
day standards a very small, primary memory (consisting of 


a few dozens of ten-digit decimal numbers only). Note that 




THE BRAIN 


the latter amounts to something like a few hundred bits— 
certainly less than 10%. In present-day computing machines 
the proper balance between machine size and memory ca- 
pacity (cf. above) is generally held to lie around something 
like 10* basic active elements, and a memory capacity of 10° 
to 10° bits. This is achieved by using forms of memory 
which are technologically entirely different from the basic 
active organs of the machine. Thus a vacuum tube or tran- 
sistor machine might have a memory residing in an electro- 
static system (a cathode ray tube), or in suitably arranged 
large aggregates of ferromagnetic cores, etc. I will not at- 
tempt a complete classification here, since other important 
forms of memory, like the acoustic delay type, the ferro- 
electric type, and the magnetostrictive delay type (this list 
could, indeed, be increased), do not fit quite so easily into 
such classifications. I just want to point out that the compo- 
nentry used in the memory may be entirely different from 
the one that underlies the basic active organs. 

These aspects of the matter seem to be very important for 
the understanding of the structure of the nervous system, 
and they would seem to be as yet predominantly unan- 
swered. We know the basic active organs of the nervous 
system (the nerve cells). There is every reason to believe 
that a very large-capacity memory is associated with this 
system. We do most emphatically not know what type of 
physical entities are the basic components for the memory 


in question. 




DIGITAL AND ANALOG PARTS IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


Digital and Analog Parts in the Nervous System 


Having pointed out in the above the deep, fundamental, 
and wide-open problems connected with the memory as- 
pect of the nervous system, it would seem best to go on to 
other questions. However, there is one more, minor aspect 
of the unknown memory subassembly in the nervous sys- 
tem, about which a few words ought to be said. These refer 
to the relationship between the analog and the digital (or 
the “mixed”) parts of the nervous system. I will devote to 
these, in what follows, a brief and incomplete additional 
discussion, after which I will go on to the questions not 
related to the memory. 

The observation I wish to make is this: processes which go 
through the nervous system may, as I pointed out before, 
change their character from digital to analog, and back to 
digital, etc., repeatedly. Nerve pulses, i.e. the digital part of 
the mechanism, may control a particular stage of such a 
process, e.g. the contraction of a specific muscle or the 
secretion of a specific chemical. This phenomenon is one 
belonging to the analog class, but it may be the origin of a 
train of nerve pulses which are due to its being sensed by 
suitable inner receptors. When such nerve pulses are being 
generated, we are back in the digital line of progression 
again. As mentioned above, such changes from a digital pro- 
cess to an analog one, and back again to a digital one, may 


alternate several times. Thus the nerve-pulse part of the 




THE BRAIN 


system, which is digital, and the one involving chemical 
changes or mechanical dislocations due to muscular contrac- 
tions, which is of the analog type, may, by alternating with 


each other, give any particular process a mixed character. 


Role of the Genetic Mechanism in the Above Context 


Now, in this context, the genetic phenomena play an espe- 
cially typical role. The genes themselves are clearly parts ofa 
digital system of components. Their effects, however, con- 
sist of stimulating the formation of specific chemicals, 
namely of definite enzymes that are characteristic of the 
gene involved, and, therefore, belong in the analog area. 
Thus, in this domain, a particular specific instance of the 
alternation between analog and digital is exhibited, i.e. this 
is a member of a broader class, to which I referred as such 


above in a more general way. 


Codes and Their Role in the Control of 
the Functioning of a Machine 


Let me now pass on to the questions involving other aspects 
than those of memory. By this I mean certain principles of 
organizing logical orders which are of considerable impor- 
tance in the functioning of any complicated automaton. 


First of all, let me introduce a term which is needed in the 




CONTROL OF THE FUNCTIONING OF A MACHINE 


present context. A system of logical instructions that an 
automaton can carry out and which causes the automaton 
to perform some organized task is called a code. By logical 
orders, I mean things like nerve pulses appearing on the 
appropriate axons, in fact anything that induces a digital 
logical system, like the nervous system, to function in a 


reproducible, purposive manner. 


The Concept of a Complete Code 


Now, in talking about codes, the following distinction be- 
comes immediately prominent. A code may be complete— 
i.e., to use the terminology of nerve pulses, one may have 
specified the sequence in which these impulses appear and 
the axons on which they appear. This will then, of course, 
define completely a specific behavior of the nervous system, 
or, in the above comparison, of the corresponding artificial 
automaton involved. In computing machines, such com- 
plete codes are sets of orders, given with all necessary speci- 
fications. If the machine is to solve a specific problem by 
calculation, it will have to be controlled by a complete code 
in this sense. The use of a modern computing machine is 
based on the user’s ability to develop and formulate the 
necessary complete codes for any given problem that the 


machine is supposed to solve. 




THE BRAIN 


The Concept of a Short Code 


In contrast to the complete codes, there exists another cate- 
gory of codes best designated as short codes. These are based 
on the following idea. 

The English logician A. M. Turing showed in 1937 (and 
various computing machine experts have put this into prac- 
tice since then in various particular ways) that itis possible to 
develop code instruction systems for a computing machine 
which cause it to behave as if it were another, specified, 
computing machine. Such systems of instructions which 
make one machine imitate the behavior of another are known 
as short codes. Let me go into a little more detail in the typical 
questions of the use and development of such short codes. 

A computing machine is controlled, as I pointed out 
above, by codes, sequences of symbols—usually binary 
symbols—i.e. by strings of bits. In any set of instructions 
that govern the use of a particular computing machine it 
must be made clear which strings of bits are orders and 
what they are supposed to cause the machine to do. 

For two different machines, these meaningful strings of bits 
need not be the same ones and, in any case, their respective 
effects in causing their corresponding machines to operate 
may well be entirely different. Thus, if a machine is pro- 
vided with a set of orders that are peculiar to another ma- 
chine, these will presumably be, in terms of the first ma- 


chine, at least in part, nonsense, i.e. strings of bits which do 




CONTROL OF THE FUNCTIONING OF A MACHINE 


not necessarily all belong to the family of the meaningful ones 
(in terms of the first-mentioned machine), or which, when 
“obeyed” by the first-mentioned machine, would cause it 
to take actions which are not part of the underlying orga- 
nized plan toward the solution of a problem, the solution of 
which is intended, and, generally speaking, would not 
cause the first-mentioned machine to behave in a purposive 
way toward the solution of a visualized, organized task, i.e. 


the solution of a specific and desired problem. 


The Function of a Short Code 


A code, which according to Turing’s schema is supposed to 
make one machine behave as if it were another specific 
machine (which is supposed to make the former imitate the 
latter) must do the following things. It must contain, in 
terms that the machine will understand (and purposively 
obey), instructions (further detailed parts of the code) that 
will cause the machine to examine every order it gets and 
determine whether this order has the structure appropriate 
to an order of the second machine. It must then contain, in 
terms of the order system of the first machine, sufficient 
orders to make the machine cause the actions to be taken 
that the second machine would have taken under the influ- 
ence of the order in question. 

The important result of Turing’s is that in this way the first 


machine can be caused to imitate the behavior of any other 




THE BRAIN 


machine. The order structure which it is thus caused to 
follow may be entirely different from that one characteristic 
of the first machine which is truly involved. Thus the order 
structure referred to may actually deal with orders of a 
much more complex character than those which are char- 
acteristic of the first machine: every one of these orders of 
the secondary machine may involve the performing of sev- 
eral operations by the first-mentioned machine. It may in- 
volve complicated, iterative processes, multiple actions of 
any kind whatsoever; generally speaking, anything that the 
first machine can do in any length of time and under the 
control of all possible order systems of any degree of com- 
plexity may now be done as if only “elementary” actions— 
basic, uncompounded, primitive orders—were involved. 
The reason for calling such a secondary code a short code is, 
by the way, historical: these short codes were developed as 
an aid to coding, i.e. they resulted from the desire to be able 
to code more briefly for a machine than its own natural 
order system would allow, treating it as if it were a different 
machine with a more convenient, fuller order system 
which would allow simpler, less circumstantial and more 


straightforward coding. 


The Logical Structure of the Nervous System 


At this point, the discussion is best redirected toward an- 


other complex of questions. These are, as I pointed out 




THE LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 


previously, not connected with the problems of the mem- 
ory or with the questions of complete and short codes just 
considered. They relate to the respective roles of logics and 
arithmetics in the functioning of any complicated automa- 


ton, and, specifically, of the nervous system. 


Importance of the Numerical Procedures 


The point involved here, one of considerable importance, is 
this. Any artificial automaton that has been constructed for 
human use, and specifically for the control of complicated 
processes, normally possesses a purely logical part and an 
arithmetical part, i.e. a part in which arithmetical processes 
play no role, and one in which they are of importance. This 
is due to the fact that it is, with our habits of thought and of 
expressing thought, very difficult to express any truly com- 
plicated situation without having recourse to formulae and 
numbers. 

Thus an automaton which is to control problems of these 
types—constancy of temperature, or of certain pressures, or 
of chemical isostasy in the human body—will, if a human 
designer has to formulate its task, have that task defined in 


terms of numerical equalities or inequalities. 


Interaction of Numerical Procedures with Logic 


On the other hand, there may be portions of this task which 


can be formulated without reference to numerical relation- 




THE BRAIN 


ships, i.e. in purely logical terms. Thus certain qualitative 
principles involving physiological response or nonresponse 
can be stated without recourse to numbers by merely stat- 
ing qualitatively under what combinations of circum- 
stances certain events are to take place and under what 


combinations they are not desired. 


Reasons for Expecting High Precision Requirements 


These remarks show that the nervous system, when viewed 
as an automaton, must definitely have an arithmetical as well 
asa logical part, and that the needs of arithmetics in it are just 
as important as those of logics. This means that we are again 
dealing with a computing machine in the proper sense and 
that a discussion in terms of the concepts familiar in com- 
puting machine theory is in order. 

In view of this, the following question immediately pre- 
sents itself: when looking at the nervous system as at a 
computing machine, with what precision is the arithmeti- 
cal part to be expected to function? 

This question is particularly crucial for the following rea- 
son: all experience with computing machines shows that if 
a computing machine has to handle as complicated arith- 
metical tasks as the nervous system obviously must, facili- 
ties for rather high levels of precision must be provided. 
The reason is that calculations are likely to be long, and in 


the course of long calculations not only do errors add up 




NATURE OF THE SYSTEM OF NOTATIONS EMPLOYED 


but also those committed early in the calculation are ampli- 
fied by the latter parts of it; therefore, considerably higher 
precision is needed than the physical nature of the problem 
would by itself appear to require. 

Thus one would expect that the arithmetical part of the 
nervous system exists and, when viewed as a computing 
machine, must operate with considerable precision. In the 
familiar artificial computing machines and under the condi- 
tions of complexity here involved, ten- or twelve-decimal 
precision would not be an exaggeration. 

This conclusion was well worth working out just because 


of, rather than in spite of, its absolute implausibility. 


Nature of the System of Notations Employed: 
Not Digital but Statistical 


As pointed out before, we know a certain amount about how 
the nervous system transmits numerical data. They are usu- 
ally transmitted by periodic or nearly periodic trains of 
pulses. An intensive stimulus on a receptor will cause the 
latter to respond each time soon after the limit of absolute 
refractoriness has been underpassed. A weaker stimulus will 
cause the receptor to respond also in a periodic or nearly 
periodic way, but with a somewhat lower frequency, since 
now not only the limit of absolute refractoriness but even a 
limit ofa certain relative refractoriness will have to be under- 


passed before each next response becomes possible. Conse- 




THE BRAIN 


quently, intensities of quantitative stimuli are rendered by 
periodic or nearly periodic pulse trains, the frequency al- 
ways being a monotone function of the intensity of the 
stimulus. This is a sort of frequency-modulated system of 
signaling; intensities are translated into frequencies. This has 
been directly observed in the case of certain fibers of the 
optic nerve and also in nerves that transmit information 
relative to (important) pressures. 

It is noteworthy that the frequency in question is not 
directly equal to any intensity of stimulus, but rather that it 
is amonotone function of the latter. This permits the intro- 
duction of all kinds of scale effects and expressions of preci- 
sion in terms that are conveniently and favorably dependent 
on the scales that arise. 

It should be noted that the frequencies in question usu- 
ally lie between 50 and 200 pulses per second. 

Clearly, under the conditions, precisions like the ones 
mentioned above (10 to 12 decimals!) are altogether out of 
question. The nervous system is a computing machine 
which manages to do its exceedingly complicated work on a 
rather low level of precision: according to the above, only 
precision levels of 2 to 3 decimals are possible. This fact must 
be emphasized again and again because no known comput- 
ing machine can operate reliably and significantly on such a 
low precision level. 

Another thing should also be noted. The system de- 


scribed above leads not only to a low level of precision, but 




NATURE OF THE SYSTEM OF NOTATIONS EMPLOYED 


also to a rather high level of reliability. Indeed, clearly, ifina 
digital system of notations a single pulse is missing, abso- 
lute perversion of meaning, ie. nonsense, may result. 
Clearly, on the other hand, if in a scheme of the above- 
described type a single pulse is lost, or even several pulses 
are lost—or unnecessarily, mistakenly, inserted—the rele- 
vant frequency, i.e. the meaning of the message, is only 
inessentially distorted. 

Now, a question arises that has to be answered signifi- 
cantly: what essential inferences about the arithmetical and 
logical structure of the computing machine that the ner- 
vous system represents can be drawn from these apparently 


somewhat conflicting observations? 


Arithmetical Deterioration. Roles of Arithmetical and Logical Depths 


To anyone who has studied the deterioration of precision in 
the course of a long calculation, the answer is clear. This 
deterioration is due, as pointed out before, to the accumula- 
tion of errors by superposition, and even more by the ampli- 
fication of errors committed early in the calculation, by the 
manipulations in the subsequent parts of the calculation; 
i.e. it is due to the considerable number of arithmetical 
operations that have to be performed in series, or in other 
words to the great arithmetical depth of the scheme. 

The fact that there are many operations to be performed in 


series is, of course, just as well a characteristic of the logical 




THE BRAIN 


structure of the scheme as of its arithmetical structure. It is, 
therefore, proper to say that all of these deterioration-of- 
precision phenomena are due to the great logical depth of the 


schemes one is dealing with here. 


Arithmetical Precision or Logical Reliability, Alternatives 


It should also be noted that the message-system used in the 
nervous system, as described in the above, is of an essen- 
tially statistical character. In other words, what matters are 
not the precise positions of definite markers, digits, but the 
statistical characteristics of their occurrence, i.e. frequen- 
cies of periodic or nearly periodic pulse-trains, etc. 

Thus the nervous system appears to be using a radically 
different system of notation from the ones we are familiar 
with in ordinary arithmetics and mathematics: instead of 
the precise systems of markers where the position—and 
presence or absence—of every marker counts decisively in 
determining the meaning of the message, we have here a 
system of notations in which the meaning is conveyed by 
the statistical properties of the message. We have seen how 
this leads to a lower level of arithmetical precision but to a 
higher level of logical reliability: a deterioration in arithme- 


tics has been traded for an improvement in logics. 




THE LANGUAGE OF THE BRAIN 


Other Statistical Traits of the Message System That Could Be Used 


This context now calls clearly for the asking of one more ques- 
tion. In the above, the frequencies of certain periodic or nearly 
periodic pulse-trains carried the message, i.e. the information. 
These were distinctly statistical traits of the message. Are there 
any other statistical properties which could similarly contrib- 
ute as vehicles in the transmission of information? 

So far, the only property of the message that was used to 
transmit information was its frequency in terms of pulses 
per second, it being understood that the message was a 
periodic or nearly periodic train of pulses. 

Clearly, other traits of the (statistical) message could also 
be used: indeed, the frequency referred to is a property of a 
single train of pulses whereas every one of the relevant 
nerves consists of a large number of fibers, each of which 
transmits numerous trains of pulses. It is, therefore, per- 
fectly plausible that certain (statistical) relationships be- 
tween such trains of pulses should also transmit informa- 
tion. In this connection it is natural to think of various 


correlation-coefficients, and the like. 


The Language of the Brain Not the 
Language of Mathematics 


Pursuing this subject further gets us necessarily into ques- 


tions of language. As pointed out, the nervous system is based 




THE BRAIN 


on two types of communications: those which do not in- 
volve arithmetical formalisms, and those which do, i.e. 
communications of orders (logical ones) and communica- 
tions of numbers (arithmetical ones). The former may be 
described as language proper, the latter as mathematics. 

It is only proper to realize that language is largely a histor- 
ical accident. The basic human languages are traditionally 
transmitted to us in various forms, but their very multi- 
plicity proves that there is nothing absolute and necessary 
about them. Just as languages like Greek or Sanskrit are 
historical facts and not absolute logical necessities, it is only 
reasonable to assume that logics and mathematics are sim- 
ilarly historical, accidental forms of expression. They may 
have essential variants, i.e. they may exist in other forms 
than the ones to which we are accustomed. Indeed, the 
nature of the central nervous system and of the message 
systems that it transmits indicate positively that this is so. 
We have now accumulated sufficient evidence to see that 
whatever language the central nervous system is using, it is 
characterized by less logical and arithmetical depth than 
what we are normally used to. The following is an obvious 
example of this: the retina of the human eye performs a 
considerable reorganization of the visual image as perceived 
by the eye. Now this reorganization is effected on the retina, 
or to be more precise, at the point of entry of the optic 
nerve by means of three successive synapses only, i.e. in 


terms of three consecutive logical steps. The statistical char- 




THE LANGUAGE OF THE BRAIN 


acter of the message system used in the arithmetics of the 
central nervous system and its low precision also indicate 
that the degeneration of precision, described earlier, cannot 
proceed very far in the message systems involved. Conse- 
quently, there exist here different logical structures from the 
ones we are ordinarily used to in logics and mathematics. 
They are, as pointed out before, characterized by less logical 
and arithmetical depth than we are used to under otherwise 
similar circumstances. Thus logics and mathematics in the 
central nervous system, when viewed as languages, must 
structurally be essentially different from those languages to 
which our common experience refers. 

It also ought to be noted that the language here involved 
may well correspond to a short code in the sense described 
earlier, rather than to a complete code: when we talk math- 
ematics, we may be discussing a secondary language, built on 
the primary language truly used by the central nervous sys- 
tem. Thus the outward forms of our mathematics are not 
absolutely relevant from the point of view of evaluating 
what the mathematical or logical language truly used by the 
central nervous system is. However, the above remarks 
about reliability and logical and arithmetical depth prove 
that whatever the system is, it cannot fail to differ consider- 
ably from what we consciously and explicitly consider as 


mathematics. 




