
An  engine  that  moves 

In  predestinate  grooves, 

I'm  not  even  a  bus  I'm  a  tram."  —MAURICE  EVAN  HARE  (1905) 


1      The  General  and  Logical 
Theory  of  Automata 

By  JOHN  VON  NEUMANN 


.  .  .  AUTOMATA  have  been  playing  a  continuously  increasing,  and 
have  by  now  attained  a  very  considerable,  role  in  the  natural  sciences. 
This  is  a  process  that  has  been  going  on  for  several  decades.  During  the 
last  part  of  this  period  automata  have  begun  to  invade  certain  parts  of 
mathematics  too — particularly,  but  not  exclusively,  mathematical  physics 
or  applied  mathematics.  Their  role  in  mathematics  presents  an  interesting 
counterpart  to  certain  functional  aspects  of  organization  in  nature.  Natural 
organisms  are,  as  a  rule,  much  more  complicated  and  subtle,  and  there 
fore  much  less  well  understood  in  detail,  than  are  artificial  automata. 
Nevertheless,  some  regularities  which  we  observe  in  the  organization  of 
the  former  may  be  quite  instructive  in  our  thinking  and  planning  of  the 
latter;  and  conversely,  a  good  deal  of  our  experiences  and  difficulties  with 
our  artificial  automata  can  be  to  some  extent  projected  on  our  interpreta 
tions  of  natural  organisms. 

PRELIMINARY  CONSIDERATIONS 

Dichotomy  of  the  Problem:  Nature  of  the  Elements,  Axiomatic  Discus 
sion  of  Their  Synthesis.  In  comparing  living  organisms,  and,  in  particular, 
that  most  complicated  organism,  the  human  central  nervous  system,  with 
artificial  automata,  the  following  limitation  should  be  kept  in  mind.  The 
natural  systems  are  of  enormous  complexity,  and  it  is  clearly  necessary  to 
subdivide  the  problem  that  they  represent  into  several  parts.- One  method 
of  subdivision,  which  is  particularly  significant  in  the  present  context,  is 
this:  The  organisms  can  be  viewed  as  made  up  of  parts  which  to  a  certain 

2070 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2071 

extent  are  independent,  elementary  units.  We  may,  therefore,  to  his  extent, 
view  as  the  first  part  of  the  problem  the  structure  and  functioning  of  such 
elementary  units  individually.  The  second  part  of  the  problem  consists  of 
understanding  how  these  elements  are  organized  into  a  whole,  and  how 
the  functioning  of  the  whole  is  expressed  in  terms  of  these  elements.  x 

The  first  part  of  the  problem  is  at  present  the  dominant  one  in  physi 
ology.  It  is  closely  connected  with  the  most  difficult  chapters  of  organic 
chemistry  and  of  physical  chemistry,  and  may  in  due  course  be  greatly 
helped  by  quantum  mechanics.  I  have  little  qualification  to  talk  about  it, 
and  it  is  not  this  part  with  which  I  shall  concern  myself  here. 

The  second  part,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  one  which  is  likely  to  attract 
those  of  us  who  have  the  background  and  the  tastes  of  a  mathematician  or 
a  logician.  With  this  attitude,  we  will  be  inclined  to  remove  the  first  part 
of  the  problem  by  the  process  of  axiomatization,  and  concentrate  on  the 
second  one. 

The  Axiomatic  Procedure.  Axiomatizing  the  behavior  of  the  elements 
means  this:  We  assume  that  the  elements  have  certain  well-defined,  out 
side,  functional  characteristics;  that  is,  they  are  to  be  treated  as  "black 
boxes."  They  are  viewed  as  automatisms,  the  inner  structure  of  which  need 
not  be  disclosed,  but  which  are  assumed  to  react  to  certain  unambiguously 
defined  stimuli,  by  certain  unambiguously  defined  responses. 

This  being  understood,  we  may  then  investigate  the  larger  organisms 
that  can  be  built  up  from  these  elements,  their  structure,  their  functioning, 
the  connections  between  the  elements,  and  the  general  theoretical  regu 
larities  that  may  be  detectable  in  the  complex  syntheses  of  the  organisms 
in  question. 

I  need  not  emphasize  the  limitations  of  this  procedure.  Investigators 
of  this  type  may  furnish  evidence  that  the  system  of c  axioms  used  is  con 
venient  and,  at  least  in  its  effects,  similar  to  reality.  They  are,  however, 
not  the  ideal  method,  and  possibly  not  even  a  very  effective  method,  to 
determine  the  validity  of  the  axioms.  Such  determinations  of  validity  be 
long  primarily  to  the  first  part  of  the  problem.  Indeed  they  are  essentially 
covered  by  the  properly  physiological  (or  chemical  or  physical-chemical) 
determinations  of  the  nature  and  properties  of  the  elements. 

The  Significant  Orders  of  Magnitude.  In  spite  of  these  limitations,  how 
ever,  the  "second  part"  as  circumscribed  above  is  important  and  difficult. 
With  any  reasonable  definition  of  what  constitutes  an  element,  the  natural 
organisms  are  very  highly  complex  aggregations  of  these  elements.  The 
number  of  cells  in  the  human  body  is  somewhere  of  the  general  order  of 
1015  or  1016.  The  number  of  neurons  in  the  central  nervous  system  is 
somewhere  of  the  order  of  1010.  We  have  absolutely  no  past  experience 
with  systems  of  this  degree  of  complexity.  All  artificial  automata  made  by 
man  have  numbers  of  parts  which  by  any  comparably  schematic  count  are 


John  von  Neumann 
2072 

of  the  order  103  to  106.  In  addition,  those  artificial  systems  which  function 
with  that  type  of  logical  flexibility  and  autonomy  that  we  find  in  the 
natural  organisms  do  not  lie  at  the  peak  of  this  scale.  The  prototypes  for 
these  systems  are  the  modern  computing  machines,  and  here  a  reasonable 

definition  of  what  constitutes  an  element  will  lead  to  counts  of  a  few  times 

103  or  104  elements. 

DISCUSSION  OF  CERTAIN  RELEVANT  TRAITS  OF 
COMPUTING  MACHINES 

Computing  Machines— Typical  Operations.  Having  made  these  general 
remarks,  let  me  now  be  more  definite,  and  turn  to  that  part  of  the  subject 
about  which  I  shall  talk  in  specific  and  technical  detail.  As  I  have  indi 
cated,  it  is  concerned  with  artificial  automata  and  more  specially  with 
computing  machines.  They  have  some  similarity  to  the  central  nervous 
system,  or  at  least  to  a  certain  segment  of  the  system's  functions.  They 
are  of  course  vastly  less  complicated,  that  is,  smaller  in  the  sense  which 
really  matters.  It  is  nevertheless  of  a  certain  interest  to  analyze  the  prob 
lem  of  organisms  and  organization  from  the  point  of  view  of  these  rela 
tively  small,  artificial  automata,  and  to  effect  their  comparisons  with  the 
central  nervous  system  from  this  frog's-view  perspective. 
I  shall  begin  by  some  statements  about  computing  machines  as  such. 
The  notion  of  using  an  automaton  for  the  purpose  of  computing  is  rela 
tively  new;  While  computing  automata  are  not  the  most  complicated 
artificial  automata  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  end  results  they  achieve, 
they  do  nevertheless  represent  the  highest  degree  of  complexity  in  the 
sense  that  they  produce  the  longest  chains  of  events  determining  and  fol 
lowing  each  other. 

There  exists  at  the  present  time  a  reasonably  well-defined  set  of  ideas 
about  when  it  is  reasonable  to  use  a  fast  computing  machine,  and  when 
it  is  not.  The  criterion  is  usually  expressed  in  terms  of  the  multiplications 
involved  in  the  mathematical  problem.  The  use  of  a  fast  computing  ma 
chine  is  believed  to  be  by  and  large  justified  when  the  computing  task 
involves  about  a  million  multiplications  or  more  in  a  sequence. 

An  expression  in  more  fundamentally  logical  terms  is  this:  In  the  rele 
vant  fields  (that  is,  in  those  parts  of  [usually  applied]  mathematics,  where 
the  use  of  such  machines  is  proper)  mathematical  experience  indicates 
the  desirability  of  precisions  of  about  ten  decimal  places.  A  single  multi 
plication  would  therefore  seem  to  involve  at  least  10  X  10  steps  (digital 
multiplications);  hence  a  million  multiplications  amount  to  at  least  10R 
operations.  Actually,  however,  multiplying  two  decimal  digits  is  not  an 
elementary  operation.  There  are  various  ways  of  breaking  it  down  into 
such,  and  all  of  them  have  about  the  same  degree  of  complexity.  The 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2073 

simplest  way  to  estimate  this  degree  of  complexity  is,  instead  of  counting 
decimal  places,  to  count  the  number  of  places  that  would  be  required  for 
the  same  precision  in  the  binary  system  of  notation  (base  2  instead  of 
base  10).  A  decimal  digit  corresponds  to  about  three  binary  digits,  hence 
ten  decimals  to  about  thirty  binary.  The  multiplication  referred  to  above, 
therefore,  consists  not  of  10  X  10,  but  of  30  X  30  elementary  steps,  that 
is,  not  102,  but  103  steps.  (Binary  digits  are  "all  or  none"  affairs,  capable 
of  the  values  0  and  1  only.  Their  multiplication  is,  therefore,  indeed  an 
elementary  operation.  By  the  way,  the  equivalent  of  10  decimals  is  33 
[rather  than  30]  binaries — but  33  X  33,  too,  is  approximately  10s.)  It 
follows,  therefore,  that  a  million  multiplications  in  the  sense  indicated 
above  are  more  reasonably  described  as  corresponding  to  109  elementary 
operations. 

Precision  and  Reliability  Requirements.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  other 
field  of  human  effort  where  the  result  really  depends  on  a  sequence  of  a 
billion  (109)  steps  in  any  artifact,  and  where,  furthermore,  it  has  the 
characteristic  that  every  step  actually  matters — or,  at  least,  may 'matter 
with  a  considerable  probability.  Yet,  precisely  this  is  true  for  computing 
machines — this  is  their  most  specific  and  most  difficult  characteristic. 

Indeed,  there  have  been  in  the  last  two  decades  automata  which  did 
,•  perform  hundreds  of  millions,  or  even  billions,  of  steps  before  they  pro 
duced  a  result.  However,  the  operation  of  these  automata  is  not  serial. 
The  large  number  of  steps  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  for  a  variety  of  reasons, 
it  is  desirable  to  do  the  same  experiment  over  and  over  again.  Such 
cumulative,  repetitive  procedures  may,  for  instance,  increase  the  size  of 
the  result,  that  is  (and  this  is  the  important  consideration),  increase  the 
significant  result,  the  "signal,"  relative  to  the  "noise"  which  contaminates 
it.  Thus  any  reasonable  count  of  the  number  of  reactions  which  a  micro 
phone  gives  before  a  verbally  interpretable  acoustic  signal  is  produced  is 
in  the  high  tens  of  thousands.  Similar  estimates  in  television  will  give  tens 
of  millions,  and  in  radar  possibly  many  billions.  If,  however,  any  of  these 
automata  makes  mistakes,  the  mistakes  usually  matter  only  to  the  extent 
of  the  fraction  of  the  total  number  of  steps  which  they  represent.  (This 
is  not  exactly  true  in  all  relevant  examples,  but  it  represents  the  qualita 
tive  situation  better  than  the  opposite  statement.)  Thus  the  larger  the 
number  of  operations  required  to  produce  a  result,  the  smaller  will  be  the 
significant  contribution  of  every  individual  operation. 

In  a  computing  machine  no  such  rule  holds.  Any  step  is  (or  may  poten 
tially  be)  as  important  as  the  whole  result;  any  error  can  vitiate  the  result 
in  its  entirety.  (This  statement  is  not  absolutely  true,  but  probably  nearly 
30  per  cent  of  all  steps  made  are  usually  of  this  sort.)  Thus  a  computing 
machine  is  one  of  the  exceptional  artifacts.  They  not  only  have  to  perform 
a  billion  or  more  steps  in  a  short  time,  but  in  a  considerable  part  of  the 


2074  John  von  Neumann 

procedure  (and  this  is  a  part  that  is  rigorously  specified  in  advance)  they 
are  permitted  not  a  single  error.  In  fact,  in  order  to  be  sure  that  the  whole 
machine  is  operative,  and  that  no  potentially  degenerative  malfunctions 
have  set  in,  the  present  practice  usually  requires  that  no  error  should  occur 
anywhere  in  the  entire  procedure. 

This  requirement  puts  the  large,  high-complexity  computing  machines 
in  an  altogether  new  light.  It  makes  in  particular  a  comparison  between 
the  computing  machines  and  the  operation  of  the  natural  organisms  not 
entirely  out  of  proportion. 

The  Analogy  Principle.  All  computing  automata  fall  into  two  great 
classes  in  a  way  which  is  immediately  obvious  and  which,  as  you  will  see 
in  a  moment,  carries  over  to  living  organisms.  This  classification  is  into 
analogy  and  digital  machines. 

Let  us  consider  the  analogy  principle  first.  A  computing  machine  may 
be  based  on  the  principle  that  numbers  are  represented  by  certain  physical 
quantities.  As  such  quantities  we  might,  for  instance,  use  the  intensity  of 
an  electrical  current,  or  the  size  of  an  electrical  potential,  or  the  number 
of  degrees  of  arc  by  which  a  disk  has  been  rotated  (possibly  in  conjunc 
tion  with  the  number  of  entire  revolutions  effected),  etc.  Operations  like 
addition,  multiplication,  and  integration  may  then  be  performed  by  find 
ing  various  natural  processes  which  act  on  these  quantities  in  the  desired 
way.  Currents  may  be  multiplied  by  feeding  them  into  the  two  magnets 
of  a  dynamometer,  thus  producing  a  rotation.  This  rotation  may  then  be 
transformed  into  an  electrical  resistance  by  the  attachment  of  a  rheostat; 
and,  finally,  the  resistance  can  be  transformed  into  a  current  by  connect 
ing  it  to  two  sources  of  fixed  (and  different)  electrical  potentials.  The 
entire  aggregate  is  thus  a  "black  box"  into  which  two  currents  are  fed  and 
which  produces  a  current  equal  to  their  product.  You  are  certainly  familiar 
with  many  other  ways  in  which  a  wide  variety  of  natural  processes  can 
be  used  to  perform  this  and  many  other  mathematical  operations. 

The  first  well-integrated,  large,  computing  machine  ever  made  was  an 
analogy  machine,  V.  Bush's  Differential  Analyzer.  This  machine,  by  the 
way,  did  the  computing  not  with  electrical  currents,  but  with  rotating 
disks.  I  shall  not  discuss  the  ingenious  tricks  by  which  the  angles  of  rota 
tion  of  these  disks  were  combined  according  to  various  operations  of 
mathematics. 

I  shall  make  no  attempt  to  enumerate,  classify,  or  systematize  the  wide 
variety  of  analogy  principles  and  mechanisms  that  can  be  used  in  com 
puting.  They  are  confusingly  multiple.  The  guiding  principle  without  which 
it  is  impossible  to  reach  an  understanding  of  the  situation  is  the  classical 
one  of  all  "communication  theory" — the  "signal  to  noise  ratio,"  That  is, 
the  critical  question  with  every  analogy  procedure  is  this:  How  large  are 
the  uncontrollable  fluctuations  of  the  mechanism  that  constitute  the 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2075 

"noise,"  compared  to  the  significant  "signals"  that  express  the  numbers 
on  which  the  machine  operates?  The  usefulness  of  any  analogy  principle 
depends  on  how  low  it  can  keep  the  relative  size  of  the  uncontrollable 
fluctuations — the  "noise  level." 

To  put  this  in  another  way.  No  analogy  machine  exists  which  will  really 
form  the  product  of  two  numbers.  What  it  will  form  is  this  product,  plus 
a  small  but  unknown  quantity  which  represents  the  random  noise  of  the 
mechanism  and  the  physical  processes  involved.  The  whole  problem  is  to 
keep  this  quantity  down.  This  principle  has  controlled  the  entire  relevant 
technology.  It  has,  for  instance,  caused  the  adoption  of  seemingly  compli 
cated  and  clumsy  mechanical  devices  instead  of  the  simpler  and  elegant 
electrical  ones.  (This,  at  least,  has  been  the  case  throughout  most  of  the 
last  twenty  years.  More  recently,  in  certain  applications  which  required 
only  very  limited  precision  the  electrical  devices  have  again  come  to  the 
fore.)  In  comparing  mechanical  with  electrical  analogy  processes,  this 
roughly  is  true:  Mechanical  arrangements  may  bring  this  noise  level  below 
the  "maximum  signal  level"  by  a  factor  of  something  like  1:104  or  105. 
In  electrical  arrangements,  the  ratio  is  rarely  much  better  than  1:102. 
These  ratios  represent,  of  course,  errors  in  the  elementary  steps  of  the  cal 
culation,  and  not  in  its  final  results.  The  latter  will  clearly  be  substantially 
larger. 

The  Digital  Principle.  A  digital  machine  works  with  the  familiar  method 
of  representing  numbers  as  aggregates  of  digits.  This  is,  by  the  way,  the 
procedure,  which  all  of  us  use  in  our  individual,  non-mechanical  com 
puting,  where  we  express  numbers  in  the  decimal  system.  Strictly  speak 
ing,  digital  computing  need  not  be  decimal.  Any  integer  larger  than  one 
may  be  used  as  the  basis  of  a  digital  notation  for  numbers.  The  decimal 
system  (base  10)  is  the  most  common  one,  and  all  digital  machines  built 
to  date  operate  in  this  system.  It  seems  likely,  however,  that  the  binary 
(base  2)  system  will,  in  the  end,  prove  preferable,  and  a  number  of  digital 
machines  using  that  system  are  now  under  construction. 

The  basic  operations  in  a  digital  machine  are  usually  the  four  species 
of  arithmetic:  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  and  division.  We 
might  at  first  think  that,  in  using  these,  a  digital  machine  possesses  (in 
contrast  to  the  analogy  machines  referred  to  above)  absolute  precision. 
This,  however,  is  not  the  case,  as  the  following  consideration  shows. 

Take  the  case  of  multiplication.  A  digital  machine  multiplying  two 
10-digit  numbers  will  produce  a  20-digit  number,  which  is  their  product, 
with  no  error  whatever.  To  this  extent  its  precision  is  absolute,  even 
though  the  electrical  or  mechanical  components  of  the  arithmetical  organ 
of  the  machine  are  as  such  of  limited  precision.  As  long  as  there  is  no 
breakdown  of  some  component,  that  is,  as  long  as  the  operation  of  each 
component  produces  only  fluctuations  within  its  preassigned  tolerance 


nA_,,  John  von  Neumann 

zu/o 

limits,  the  result  will  be  absolutely  correct.  This  is,  of  course,  the  great  and 
characteristic  virtue  of  the  digital  procedure.  Error,  as  a  matter  of  normal 
operation  and  not  solely  (as  indicated  above)  as  an  accident  attributable 
to  some  definite  breakdown,  nevertheless  creeps  in,  in  the  following  man 
ner.  The  absolutely  correct  product  of  two  10-digit  numbers  is  a  20-digit 
number.  If  the  machine  is  built  to  handle  10-digit  numbers  only,  it  will 
have  to  disregard  the  last  10  digits  of  this  20-digit  number  and  work  with 
the  first  10  digits  alone.  (The  small,  though  highly  practical,  improvement 
due  to  a  possible  modification  of  these  digits  by  "round-off"  may  be  dis 
regarded  here.)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  machine  can  handle  20-digit 
numbers,  then  the  multiplication  of  two  such  will  produce  40  digits,  and 
these  again  have  to  be  cut  down  to  20,  etc.,  etc.  (To  conclude,  no  matter 
what  the  maximum  number  of  digits  is  for  which  the  machine  has  been 
built,  hi  the  course  of  successive  multiplications  this  maximum  will  be 
reached,  sooner  or  later.  Once  it  has  been  reached,  the  next  multiplication 
will  produce  supernumerary  digits,  and  the  product  will  have  to  be  cut  to 
half  of  its  digits  [the  first  half,  suitably  rounded  off].  The  situation  for  a 
maximum  of  10  digits,  is  therefore  typical,  and  we  might  as  well  use  it 
to  exemplify  things.) 

Thus  the  necessity  of  rounding  off  an  (exact)  20-digit  product  to  the 
regulation  (maximum)  number  of  10  digits,  introduces  in  a  digital  ma 
chine  qualitatively  the  same  situation  as  was  found  above  in  an  analogy 
machine.  What  it  produces  when  a  product  is  called  for  is  not  that  product 
itself,  but  rather  the  product  plus  a  small  extra  term — the  round-off  error. 
This  error  is,  of  course,  not  a  random  variable  like  the  noise  in  an  analogy 
machine.  It  is,  arithmetically,  completely  determined  in  every  particular 
instance.  Yet  its  mode  of  determination  is  so  complicated,  and  its  vari 
ations  throughout  the  number  of  instances  of  its  occurrence  in  a  problem 
so  irregular,  that  it  usually  can  be  treated  to  a  high  degree  of  approxima 
tion  as  a  random  variable. 

(These  considerations  apply  to  multiplication.  For  division  the  situation 
is  even  slightly  worse,  since  a  quotient  can,  in  general,  not  be  expressed 
with  absolute  precision  by  any  finite  number  of  digits.  Hence  here 
rounding  off  is  usually  already  a  necessity  after  the  first  operation.  For 
addition  and  subtraction,  on  the  other  hand,  this  difficulty  does  not  arise: 
The  sum  or  difference  has  the  same  number  of  digits  [if  there  is  no  in 
crease  in  size  beyond  the  planned  maximum]  as  the  addends  themselves. 
Size  may  create  difficulties  which  are  added  to  the  difficulties  of  precision 
discussed  here,  but  I  shall  not  go  into  these  at  this  time.) 

The  Role  of  the  Digital  Procedure  in  Reducing  the  Noise  Level  The 
important  difference  between  the  noise  level  of  a  digital  machine,  as  de 
scribed  above,  and  of  an  analogy  machine  is  not  qualitative  at  all;  it  is 
quantitative.  As  pointed  out  above,  the  relative  noise  level  of  an  analogy 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2077 

machine  is  never  lower  than  1  in  105,  and  in  many  cases  as  high  as  1  in 
102.  In  the  10-place  decimal  digital  machine  referred  to  above  the  relative 
noise  level  (due  to  round-off)  is  1  part  in  1010.  Thus  the  real  importance 
of  the  digital  procedure  lies  in  its  ability  to  reduce  the  computational 
noise  level  to  an  extent  which  is  completely  unobtainable  by  any  other 
(analogy)  procedure.  In  addition,  further  reduction  of  the  noise  level  is 
increasingly  difficult  in  an  analogy  mechanism,  and  increasingly  easy  in  a 
digital  one.  In  an  analogy  machine  a  precision  of  1  in  103  is  easy  to 
achieve;  1  in  104  somewhat  difficult;  1  in  105  very  difficult;  and  1  in  10e 
impossible,  in  the  present  state  of  technology.  In  a  digital  machine,  the 
above  precisions  mean  merely  that  one  builds  the  machine  to  3,  4,  5,  and 
6  decimal  places,  respectively.  Here  the  transition  from  each  stage  to  the 
next  one  gets  actually  easier.  Increasing  a  3-place  machine  (if  anyone 
wished  to  build  such  a  machine)  to  a  4-place  machine  is  a  33  per  cent 
increase;  going  from  4  to  5  places,  a  25  per  cent  increase;  going  from  5 
to  6  places,  a  20  per  cent  increase.  Going  from  10  to  11  places  is  only  a 
10  per  cent  increase.  This  is  clearly  an  entirely  different  milieu,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  reduction  of  "random  noise,"  from  that  of  physical 
processes.  It  is  here — and  not  in  its  practically  ineffective  absolute  re 
liability — that  the  importance  of  the  digital  procedure  lies. 


COMPARISONS  BETWEEN   COMPUTING   MACHINES   AND 
LIVING  ORGANISMS 

Mixed  Character  of  Living  Organisms.  When  the  central  nervous  sys 
tem  is  examined,  elements  of  both  procedures,  digital  and  analogy,  are 
discernible. 

The  neuron  transmits  an  impulse.  This  appears  to  be  its  primary  func 
tion,  even  if  the  last  word  about  this  function  and  its  exclusive  or  non 
exclusive  character  is  far  from  having  been  said.  The  nerve  impulse  seems 
in  the  main  to  be  an  all-or-none  affair,  comparable  to  a  binary  digit.  Thus 
a  digital  element  is  evidently  present,  but  it  is  equally  evident  that  this  is 
not  the  entire  story.  A  great  deal  of  what  goes  on  in  the  organism  is  not 
mediated  in  this  manner,  but  is  dependent  on  the  general  chemical  com 
position  of  the  blood  stream  or  of  other  humoral  media.  It  is  well  known 
that  there  are  various  composite  functional  sequences  in  the  organism 
which  have  to  go  through  a  variety  of  steps  from  the  original  stimulus  to 
the  ultimate  effect — some  of  the  steps  being  neural,  that  is,  digital,  and 
others  humoral,  that  is,  analogy.  These  digital  and  analogy  portions  in 
such  a  chain  may  alternately  multiply.  In  certain  cases  of  this  type,  the 
chain  can  actually  feed  back  into  itself,  that  is,  its  ultimate  output  may 
again  stimulate  its  original  input. 

It  is  well  known  that  such  mixed  (part  neural  and  part  humoral)  feed- 


2Q7g  John  von  Neumann 

back  chains  can  produce  processes  of  great  importance.  Thus  the  mecha 
nism  which  keeps  the  blood  pressure  constant  is  of  this  mixed  type.  The 
nerve  which  senses  and  reports  the  blood  pressure  does  it  by  a  sequence 
of  neural  impulses,  that  is,  in  a  digital  manner.  The  muscular  contraction 
which  this  impulse  system  induces  may  still  be  described  as  a  superposition 
of  many  digital  impulses.  The  influence  of  such  a  contraction  on  the  blood 
stream  is,  however,  hydrodynamical,  and  hence  analogy.  The  reaction  of 
the  pressure  thus  produced  back  on  the  nerve  which  reports  the  pressure 
closes  the  circular  feedback,  and  at  this  point  the  analogy  procedure  again 
goes  over  into  a  digital  one.  The  comparisons  between  the  living  organisms 
and  the  computing  machines  are,  therefore,  certainly  imperfect  at  this 
point.  The  living  organisms  are  very  complex — part  digital  and  part 
analogy  mechanisms.  The  computing  machines,  at  least  in  their  recent 
forms  to  which  I  am  referring  in  this  discussion,  are  purely  digital.  Thus 
I  must  ask  you  to  accept  this  oversimplification  of  the  system.  Although 
I  am  well  aware  of  the  analogy  component  in  living  organisms,  and  it 
would  be  absurd  to  deny  its  importance,  I  shall,  nevertheless,  for  the  sake 
of  the  simpler  discussion,  disregard  that  part.  I  shall  consider  the  living 
organisms  as  if  they  were  purely  digital  automata. 

Mixed  Character  of  Each  Element.  In  addition  to  this,  one  may  argue 
that  even  the  neuron  is  not  exactly  a  digital  organ.  This  point  has  been  put 
forward  repeatedly  and  with  great  force.  There  is  certainly  a  great  deal  of 
truth  in  it,  when  one  considers  things  in  considerable  detail  The  relevant 
assertion  is,  in  this  respect,  that  the  fully  developed  nervous  impulse,  to 
which  all-or-none  character  can  be  attributed,  is  not  an  elementary  phe 
nomenon,  but  is  highly  complex.  It  is  a  degenerate  state  of  the  complicated 
electrochemical  complex  which  constitutes  the  neuron,  and  which  in  its 
fully  analyzed  functioning  must  be  viewed  as  an  analogy  machine.  Indeed, 
it  is  possible  to  stimulate  the  neuron  in  such  a  way  that  the  breakdown 
that  releases  the  nervous  stimulus  will  not  occur.  In  this  area  of  "sub 
liminal  stimulation,"  we  find  first  (that  is,  for  the  weakest  stimulations) 
responses  which  are  proportional  to  the  stimulus,  and  then  (at  higher,  but 
still  subliminal,  levels  of  stimulation)  responses  which  depend  on  more 
complicated  non-linear  laws,  but  are  nevertheless  continuously  variable 
and  not  of  the  breakdown  type.  There  are  also  other  complex  phenomena 
within  and  without  the  subliminal  range:  fatigue,  summation,  certain 
forms  of  self-oscillation,  etc. 

In  spite  of  the  truth  of  these  observations,  it  should  be  remembered 
that  they  may  represent  an  improperly  rigid  critique  of  the  concept  of  an 
all-or-none  organ.  The  electromechanical  relay,  or  the  vacuum  tube,  when 
properly  used,  are  undoubtedly  all-or-none  organs.  Indeed,  they  are  the 
prototypes  of  such  organs.  Yet  both  of  them  are  in  reality  complicated 
analogy  mechanisms,  which  upon  appropriately  adjusted  stimulation  re- 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2079 

spend  continuously,  linearly  or  non-linearly,  and  exhibit  the  phenomena 
of  "breakdown"  or  "all-or-none"  response  only  under  very  particular  con 
ditions  of  operation.  There  is  little  difference  between  this  performance 
and  the  above-described  performance  of  neurons.  To  put  it  somewhat  dif 
ferently.  None  of  these  is  an  exclusively  all-or-none  organ  (there  is  little 
in  our  technological  or  physiological  experience  to  indicate  that  absolute 
all-or-none  organs  exist);  this,  however,  is  irrelevant.  By  an  all-or-none 
organ  we  should  rather  mean  one  which  fulfills  the  following  two  condi 
tions.  First,  it  functions  in  the  all-or-none  manner  under  certain  suitable 
operating  conditions.  Second,  these  operating  conditions  are  the  ones 
under  which  it  is  normally  used;  they  represent  the  functionally  normal 
state  of  affairs  within  the  large  organism,  of  which  it  forms  a  part.  Thus 
the  important  fact  is  not  whether  an  organ  has  necessarily  and  under  all 
conditions  the  all-or-none  character — this  is  probably  never  the  case — but 
rather  whether  in  its  proper  context  it  functions  primarily,  and  appears 
to  be  intended  to  function  primarily,  as  an  all-or-none  organ.  I  realize  that 
this  definition  brings  in  rather  undesirable  criteria  of  "propriety"  of  con 
text,  of  "appearance"  and  "intention."  I  do  not  see,  however,  how  we  can 
avoid  using  them,  and  how  we  can  forego  counting  on  the  employment 
of  common  sense  in  their  application.  I  shall,  accordingly,  in  what  follows 
use  the  working  hypothesis  that  the  neuron  is  an  all-or-none  digital  organ. 
I  realize  that  the  last  word  about  this  has  not  been  said,  but  I  hope  that 
the  above  excursus  on  the  limitations  of  this  working  hypothesis  and  the 
reasons  for  its  use  will  reassure  you.  I  merely  want  to  simplify  my  discus 
sion;  I  am  not  trying  to  prejudge  any  essential  open  question. 

In  the  same  sense,  I  think  that  it  is  permissible  to  discuss  the  neurons 
as  electrical  organs.  The  stimulation  of  a  neuron,  the  development  and 
progress  of  its  impulse,  and  the  stimulating  effects  of  the  impulse  at  a 
synapse  can  all  be  described  electrically.  The  concomitant  chemical  and 
other  processes  are  important  in  order  to  understand  the  internal  function 
ing  of  a  nerve  cell.  They  may  even  be  more  important  than  the  electrical 
phenomena.  They  seem,  however,  to  be  hardly  necessary  for  a  description 
of  a  neuron  as  a  "black  box,"  an  organ  of  the  all-or-none  type.  Again 
the  situation  is  no  worse  here  than  it  is  for,  say,  a  vacuum  tube.  Here, 
too,  the  purely  electrical  phenomena  are  accompanied  by  numerous  other 
phenomena  of  solid  state  physics,  thermodynamics,  mechanics.  All  of 
these  are  important  to  understand  the  structure  of  a  vacuum  tube,  but  are 
best  excluded  from  the  discussion,  if  it  is  to  treat  the  vacuum  tube  as  a 
"black  box"  with  a  schematic  description. 

The  Concept  of  a  Switching  Organ  or  Relay  Organ.  The  neuron,  as 
well  as  the  vacuum  tube,  viewed  under  the  aspects  discussed  above,  are 
then  two  instances  of  the  same  generic  entity,  which  it  is  customary  to 
call  a  "switching  organ"  or  "relay  organ."  (The  electromechanical  relay 


2080 


John  von  Neumann 


is,  of  course,  another  instance.)  Such  an  organ  is  defined  as  a  "black  box," 
which  responds  to  a  specified  stimulus  or  combination  of  stimuli  by  an 
energetically  independent  response.  That  is,  the  response  is  expected  to 
have  enough  energy  to  cause  several  stimuli  of  the  same  kind  as  the  ones 
which  initiated  it.  The  energy  of  the  response,  therefore,  cannot  have  been 
supplied  by  the  original  stimulus.  It  must  originate  in  a  different  and  in 
dependent  source  of  power.  The  stimulus  merely  directs,  controls  the  flow 
of  energy  from  this  source. 

(This  source,  in  the  case  of  the  neuron,  is  the  general  metabolism  of 
the  neuron.  In  the  case  of  a  vacuum  tube,  it  is  the  power  which  main 
tains  the  cathode-plate  potential  difference,  irrespective  of  whether  the 
tube  is  conducting  or  not,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  the  heater  power  which 
keeps  "boiling"  electrons  out  of  the  cathode.  In  the  case  of  the  electro 
mechanical  relay,  it  is  the  current  supply  whose  path  the  relay  is  closing 
or  opening.) 

The  basic  switching  organs  of  the  living  organisms,  at  least  to  the  extent 
to  which  we  are  considering  them  here,  are  the  neurons.  The  basic  switch 
ing  organs  of  the  recent  types  of  computing  machines  are  vacuum  tubes; 
in  older  ones  they  were  wholly  or  partially  electromechanical  relays.  It  is 
quite  possible  that  computing  machines  will  not  always  be  primarily  aggre 
gates  of  switching  organs,  but  such  a  development  is  as  yet  quite  far  in 
the  future.  A  development  which  may  lie  much  closer  is  that  the  vacuum 
tubes  may  be  displaced  from  their  role  of  switching  organs  in  computing 
machines.  This,  too,  however,  will  probably  not  take  place  for  a  few 
years  yet.  I  shall,  therefore,  discuss  computing  machines  solely  from 
the  point  of  view  of  aggregates  of  switching  organs  which  are  vacuum 
tubes. 

Comparison  of  the  Sizes  of  Large  Computing  Machines  and  Living 
Organisms.  Two  well-known,  very  large  vacuum  tube  computing  machines 
are  in  existence  and  in  operation.  Both  consist  of  about  20,000  switching 
organs.  One  is  a  pure  vacuum  tube  machine.  (It  belongs  to  the  U.  S. 
Army  Ordnance  Department,  Ballistic  Research  Laboratories,,  Aberdeen, 
Maryland,  designation  "ENIAC.")  The  other  is  mixed — part  vacuum  tube 
and  part  electromechanical  relays.  (It  belongs  to  the  I.  B.  M.  Corporation, 
and  is  located  in  New  York,  designation  "SSEC.")  These  machines  are  a 
good  deal  larger  than  what  is  likely  to  be  the  size  of  the  vacuum  tube 
computing  machines  which  will  come  into  existence  and  operation  in  the 
next  few  years.  It  is  probable  that  each  one  of  these  will  consist  of  2000 
to  6000  switching  organs.  (The  reason  for  this  decrease  lies  in  a  different 
attitude  about  the  treatment  of  the  "memory,"  which  I  will  not  discuss 
here.)  It  is  possible  that  in  later  years  the  machine  sizes  will  increase 
again,  but  it  is  not  likely  that  10,000  (or  perhaps  a  few  times  10,000) 
switching  organs  will  be  exceeded  as  long  as  the  present  techniques  and 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2081 

philosophy  are  employed.  To  sum  up,  about  104  switching  organs  seem 
to  be  the  proper  order  of  magnitude  for  a  computing  machine. 

In  contrast  tq  this,  the  number  of  neurons  in  the  central  nervous  system 
has  been  variously  estimated  as  something  of  the  order  of  1010.  I  do  not 
know  how  good  this  figure  is,  but  presumably  the  exponent  at  least  is  not 
too  high,  and  not  too  low  by  more  than  a  unit.  Thus  it  is  very  conspicuous 
that  the  central  nervous  system  is  at  least  a  million  times  larger  than  the 
largest  artificial  automaton  that  we  can  talk  about  at  present.  It  is  quite 
interesting  to  inquire  why  this  should  be  so  and  what  questions  of  prin 
ciple  are  involved.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  few  very  clear-cut  questions  of 
principle  are  indeed  involved. 

Determination  of  the  Significant  Ratio  of  Sizes  for  the  Elements.  Obvi 
ously,  the  vacuum  tube,  as  we  know  it,  is  gigantic  compared  to  a  nerve 
cell.  Its  physical  volume  is  about  a  billion  times  larger,  and  its  energy 
dissipation  is  about  a  billion  times  greater.  (It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to 
give  such  figures  with  a  unique  validity,  but  the  above  ones  are  typical.) 
There  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a  certain  compensation  for  this.  Vacuum 
tubes  can  be  made  to  operate  at  exceedingly  high  speeds  in  applications 
other  than  computing  machines,  but  these  need  not  concern  us  here.  In 
computing  machines  the  maximum  is  a  good  deal  lower,  but  it  is  still  quite 
respectable.  In  the  present  state  of  the  art,  it  is  generally  believed  to  be 
somewhere  around  a  million  actuations  per  second.  The  responses  of  a 
nerve  cell  are  a  good  deal  slower  than  this,  perhaps  %ooo  of  a  second,  and 
what  really  matters,  the  minimum  time-interval  required  from  stimulation 
to  complete  recovery  and,  possibly,  renewed  stimulation,  is  still  longer 
than  this — at  best  approximately  %oo  of  a  second.  This  gives  a  ratio  of 
1 : 5000,  which,  however,  may  be  somewhat  too  favorable  to  the  vacuum 
tube,  since  vacuum  tubes,  when  used  as  switching  organs  at  the  1,000,000 
steps  per  second  rate,  are  practically  never  run  at  a  100  per  cent  duty 
cycle.  A  ratio  like  1 : 2000  would,  therefore,  seem  to  be  more  equitable. 
Thus  the  vacuum  tube,  at  something  like  a  billion  times  the  expense,  out 
performs  the  neuron  by  a  factor  of  somewhat  over  1000.  There  is,  there 
fore,  some  justice  in  saying  that  it  is  less  efficient  by  a  factor  of  the  order 
of  a  million. 

The  basic  fact  is,  in  every  respect,  the  small  size  of  the  neuron  com 
pared  to  the  vacuum  tube.  This  ratio  is  about  a  billion,  as  pointed  out 
above.  What  is  it  due  to? 

Analysis  of  the  Reasons  for  the  Extreme  Ratio  of  Sizes.  The  origin  of 
this  discrepancy  lies  in  the  fundamental  control  organ  or,  rather,  control 
arrangement  of  the  vacuum  tube  as  compared  to  that  of  the  neuron.  In 
the  vacuum  tube  the  critical  area  of  control  is  the  space  between  the 
cathode  (where  the  active  agents,  the  electrons,  originate)  and  the  grid 
(which  controls  the  electron  flow).  This  space  is  about  one  millimeter 


John  von  Neumann 
2082 

deep.  The  corresponding  entity  in  a  neuron  is  the  wall  of  the  nerve  cell, 
the  "membrane."  Its  thickness  is  about  a  micron  (%ooo  millimeter),  or 
somewhat  less.  At  this  point,  therefore,  there  is  a  ratio  of  approximately 
1:1000  in  linear  dimensions.  This,  by  the  way,  is  the  main  difference.  The 
electrical  fields,  which  exist  in  the  controlling  space,  are  about  the  same 
for  the  vacuum  tube  and  for  the  neuron.  The  potential  differences  by 
which  these  organs  can  be  reliably  steered  are  tens  of  volts  in  one  case 
and  tens  of  millivolts  in  the  other.  Their  ratio  is  again  about  1 : 1000,  and 
hence  their  gradients  (the  field  strengths)  are  about  identical.  Now  a  ratio 
of  1:1000  in  linear  dimensions  corresponds  to  a  ratio  of  1:1,000,000,000 
in  volume.  Thus  the  discrepancy  factor  of  a  billion  in  3 -dimensional  size 
(volume)  corresponds,  as  it  should,  to  a  discrepancy  factor  of  1000  in 
linear  size,  that  is,  to  the  difference  between  the  millimeter  interelectrode- 
space  depth  of  the  vacuum  tube  and  the  micron  membrane  thickness  of 
the  neuron. 

It  is  worth  noting,  although  it  is  by  no  means  surprising,  how  this 
divergence  between  objects,  both  of  which  are  microscopic  and  are  situ 
ated  in  the  interior  of  the  elementary  components,  leads  to  impressive 
macroscopic  differences  between  the  organisms  built  upon  them.  This 
difference  between  a  millimeter  object  and  a  micron  object  causes  the 
ENIAC  to  weigh  30  tons  and  to  dissipate  150  kilowatts  of  energy,  while 
the  human  central  nervous  system,  which  is  functionally  about  a  million 
times  larger,  has  the  weight  of  the  order  of  a  pound  and  is  accommodated 
within  the  human  skull.  In  assessing  the  weight  and  size  of  the  ENIAC 
as  stated  above,  we  should  also  remember  that  this  huge  apparatus  is 
needed  in  order  to  handle  20  numbers  of  10  decimals  each,  that  is,  a  total 
of  200  decimal  digits,  the  equivalent  of  about  700  binary  digits — merely 
700  simultaneous  pieces  of  "yes~no"  information! 

Technological  Interpretation  of  These  Reasons.  These  considerations 
should  make  it  clear  that  our  present  technology  is  still  very  imperfect 
in  handling  information  at  high  speed  and  high  degrees  of  complexity.  The 
apparatus  which  results  is  simply  enormous,  both  physically  and  in  its 
energy  requirements. 

The  weakness  of  this  technology  lies  probably,  in  part  at  least,  in  the 
materials  employed.  Our  present  techniques  involve  the  using  of  metals, 
with  rather  close  spacings,  and  at  certain  critical  points  separated  by 
vacuum  only.  This  combination  of  media  has  a  peculiar  mechanical  in 
stability  that  is  entirely  alien  to  living  nature.  By  this  I  mean  the  simple 
fact  that,  if  a  living  organism  is  mechanically  injured,  it  has  a  strong 
tendency  to  restore  itself.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  hit  a  man-made 
mechanism  with  a  sledge  hammer,  no  such  restoring  tendency  is  apparent. 
If  two  pieces  of  metal  are  close  together,  the  small  vibrations  and  other 
mechanical  disturbances,  which  always  exist  in  the  ambient  medium,  con- 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2083 

stitute  a  risk  in  that  they  may  bring  them  into  contact.  If  they  were  at 
different  electrical  potentials,  the  next  thing  that  may  happen  after  this 
short  circuit  is  that  they  can  become  electrically  soldered  together  and  the 
contact  becomes  permanent.  At  this  point,  then,  a  genuine  and  permanent 
breakdown  will  have  occurred.  When  we  injure  the  membrane  of  a  nerve 
cell,  no  such  thing  happens.  On  the  contrary,  the  membrane  will  usually 
reconstitute  itself  after  a  short  delay. 

It  is  this  mechanical  instability  of  our  materials  which  prevents  us  from 
reducing  sizes  further.  This  instability  and  other  phenomena  of  a  com 
parable  character  make  the  behavior  in  our  componentry  less  than  wholly 
reliable,  even  at  the  present  sizes.  Thus  it  is  the  inferiority  of  our  mate 
rials,  compared  with  those  used  in  nature,  which  prevents  us  from  attain 
ing  the  high  degree  of  complication  and  the  small  dimensions  which  have 
been  attained  by  natural  organisms. 

THE  FUTURE  LOGICAL  THEORY  OF  AUTOMATA 

Further  Discussion  of  the  Factors  That  Limit  the  Present  Size  of  Arti 
ficial  Automata.  We  have  emphasized  how  the  complication  is  limited  in 
artificial  automata,  that  is,  the  complication  which  can  be  handled  without 
extreme  difficulties  and  for  which  automata  can  still  be  expected  to  func 
tion  reliably.  Two  reasons  that  put  a  limit  on  complication  in  this  sense 
have  already  been  given.  They  are  the  large  size  and  the  limited  reliability 
of  the  componentry  that  we  must  see,  both  of  them  due  to  the  fact  that 
we  are  employing  materials  which  seem  to  be  quite  satisfactory  in  simpler 
applications,  but  marginal  and  inferior  to  the  natural  ones  in  this  highly 
complex  application.  There  is,  however,  a  third  important  limiting  factor, 
and  we  should  now  turn  our  attention  to  it.  This  factor  is  of  an  intellectual, 
and  not  physical,  character. 

The  Limitation  Which  Is  Due  to  the  Lack  of  a  Logical  Theory  of 
Automata.  We  are  very  far  from  possessing  a  theory  of  automata  which 
deserves  that  name,  that  is,  a  properly  mathematical-logical  theory.  There 
exists  today  a  very  elaborate  system  of  formal  logic,  and,  specifically,  of 
logic  as  applied  to  mathematics.  This  is  a  discipline  with  many  good  sides, 
but  also  with  certain  serious  weaknesses.  This  is  not  the  occasion  to  en 
large  upon  the  good  sides,  which  I  have  certainly  no  intention  to  belittle, 
About  the  inadequacies,  however,  this  may  be  said:  Everybody  who  has 
worked  in  formal  logic  will  confirm  that  it  is  one  of  the  technically  most 
refractory  parts  of  mathematics.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  it  deals  with 
rigid,  all-or-none  concepts,  and  has  very  little  contact  with  the  continuous 
concept  of  the  real  or  of  the  complex  number,  that  is,  with  mathematical 
analysis.  Yet  analysis  is  the  technically  most  successful  and  best-elaborated 
part  of  mathematics.  Thus  formal  logic  is,  by  the  nature  of  its  approach, 


John  von  Neumann 
2084 

cut  off  from  the  best  cultivated  portions  of  mathematics,  and  forced  onto 
the  most  difficult  part  of  the  mathematical  terrain,  into  combinatorics. 

The  theory  of  automata,  of  the  digital,  all-or-none  type,  as  discussed  up 
to  now,  is  certainly  a  chapter  in  formal  logic.  It  would,  therefore,  seem 
that  it  will  have  to  share  this  unattractive  property  of  formal  logic.  It  will 
have  to  be,  from  the  mathematical  point  of  view,  combinatorial  rather 

than  analytical. 

Probable  Characteristics  of  Such  a  Theory.  Now  it  seems  to  me  that 
this  will  in  fact  not  be  the  case.  In  studying  the  functioning  of  automata, 
it  is  clearly  necessary  to  pay  attention  to  a  circumstance  which  has  never 
before  made  its  appearance  in  formal  logic. 

Throughout  all  modern  logic,  the  only  thing  that  is  important  is  whether 
a  result  can  be  achieved  in  a  finite  number  of  elementary  steps  or  not. 
The  size  of  the  number  of  steps  which  are  required,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  hardly  ever  a  concern  of  formal  logic.  Any  finite  sequence  of  correct 
steps  is,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  as  good  as  any  other.  It  is  a  matter  of 
no  consequence  whether  the  number  is  small  or  large,  or  even  so  large 
that  it  couldn't  possibly  be  carried  out  in  a  lifetime,  or  in  the  presumptive 
lifetime  of  the  stellar  universe  as  we  know  it.  In  dealing  with  automata, 
this  statement  must  be  significantly  modified.  In  the  case  of  an  automaton 
the  thing  which  matters  is  not  only  whether  it  can  reach  a  certain  result 
in  a  finite  number  of  steps  at  all  but  also  how  many  such  steps  are  needed. 
-There  are  two  reasons.  First,  automata  are  constructed  in  order  to  reach 
certain  results  in  certain  pre-assigned  durations,  or  at  least  in  pre-assigned 
orders  of  magnitude  of  duration.  Second,  the  componentry  employed  has 
on  every  individual  operation  a  small  but  nevertheless  non-zero  probability 
of  failing.  In  a  sufficiently  long  chain  of  operations  the  cumulative  effect 
of  these  individual  probabilities  of  failure  may  (if  unchecked)  reach  the 
order  of  magnitude  of  unity — at  which  point  it  produces,  in  effect,  com 
plete  unreliability.  The  probability  levels  which  are  involved  here  are  very 
low,  but  still  not  too  far  removed  from  the  domain  of  ordinary  tech 
nological  experience.  It  is  not  difficult  to  estimate  that  a  high-speed  com 
puting  machine,  dealing  with  a  typical  problem,  may  have  to  perform  as 
much  as  1012  individual  operations.  The  probability  of  error  on  an  indi 
vidual  operation  which  can  be  tolerated  must,  therefore,  be  small  com 
pared  to  10~12.  I  might  mention  that  an  electromechanical  relay  (a  tele 
phone  relay)  is  at  present  considered  acceptable  if  its  probability  of  failure 
on  an  individual  operation  is  of  the  order  10~8.  It  is  considered  excellent 
if  this  order  of  probability  is  10~9.  Thus  the  reliabilities  required  in  a 
high-speed  computing  machine  are  higher,  but  not  prohibitively  higher, 
than  those  that  constitute  sound  practice  in  certain  existing  industrial 
fields.  The  actually  obtainable  reliabilities  are,  however,  not  likely  to  leave 
a  very  wide  margin  against  the  minimum  requirements  just  mentioned. 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2085 

An  exhaustive  study  and  a  non-trivial  theory  will,  therefore,  certainly  be 
called  for, 

Thus  the  logic  of  automata  will  differ  from  the  present  system  of 
formal  logic  in  two  relevant  respects. 

1.  The  actual  length  of  "chains  of  reasoning,"  that  is,  of  the  chains  of 
operations,  will  have  to  be  considered. 

2.  The  operations  of  logic  (syllogisms,  conjunctions,  disjunctions,  nega 
tions,  etc.,  that  is,  in  the  terminology  that  is  customary  for  automata, 
various  forms  of  gating,   coincidence,   anti-coincidence,  blocking,   etc., 
actions)  will  all  have  to  be  treated  by  procedures  which  allow  exceptions 
(malfunctions)  with  low  but  non-zero  probabilities.  All  of  this  will  lead 
to  theories  which  are  much  less  rigidly  of  an  all-or-none  nature  than  past 
and  present  formal  logic.  They  will  be  of  a  much  less  combinatorial,  and 
much  more  analytical,  character.  In  fact,  there  are  numerous  indications 
to  make  us  believe  that  this  new  system  of  formal  logic  will  move  closer 
to  another  discipline  which  has  been  little  linked  in  the  past  with  logic. 
This  is  thermodynamics,  primarily  in  the  form  it  was  received  from  Boltz- 
mann,  and  is  that  part  of  theoretical  physics  which  comes  nearest  in  some 
of  its  aspects  to  manipulating  and  measuring  information.  Its  techniques 
are  indeed  much  more  analytical  than  combinatorial,  which  again  illus 
trates  the  point  that  I  have  been  trying  to  make  above.  It  would,  however, 
take  me  too  far  to  go  into  this  subject  more  thoroughly  on  this  occasion. 

All  of  this  re-emphasizes  the  conclusion  that  was  indicated  earlier,  that 
a  detailed,  highly  mathematical,  and  more  specifically  analytical,  theory 
of  automata  and  of  information  is  needed.  We  possess  only  the  first  indi 
cations  of  such  a  theory  at  present.  In  assessing  artificial  automata,  which 
are,  as  I  discussed  earlier,  of  only  moderate  size,  it  has  been  possible  to 
get  along  in  a  rough,  empirical  manner  without  such  a  theory.  There  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  this  will  not  be  possible  with  more  elaborate 
automata. 

Effects  of  the  Lack  of  a  Logical  Theory  of  A  utomata  on  the  Procedures 
in  Dealing  with  Errors.  This,  then,  is  the  last,  and  very  important,  limiting 
factor.  It  is  unlikely  that  we  could  construct  automata  of  a  much  higher 
complexity  than  the  ones  we  now  have,  without  possessing  a  very  ad 
vanced  and  subtle  theory  of  automata  and  information.  A  fortiori,  this  is 
inconceivable  for  automata  of  such  enormous  complexity  as  is  possessed 
by  the  human  central  nervous  system. 

This  intellectual  inadequacy  certainly  prevents  us  from  getting  much 
farther  than  we  are  now. 

A  simple  manifestation  of  this  factor  is  our  present  relation  to  error 
checking.  In  living  organisms  malfunctions  of  components  occur.  The 
organism  obviously  has  a  way  to  detect  them  and  render  them  harmless. 
It  is  easy  to  estimate  that  the  number  of  nerve  actuations  which  occur  in 


„„-,.  John  von  Neumann 

Zuoo 

a  normal  lifetime  must  be  of  the  order  of  1020.  Obviously,  during  this 
chain  of  events  there  never  occurs  a  malfunction  which  cannot  be  cor 
rected  by  the  organism  itself,  without  any  significant  outside  intervention. 
The  system  must,  therefore,  contain  the  necessary  arrangements  to  diag 
nose  errors  as  they  occur,  to  readjust  the  organism  so  as  to  minimize  the 
effects  of  the  errors,  and  finally  to  correct  or  to  block  permanently  the 
faulty  components.  Our  modus  procedendi  with  respect  to  malfunctions  in 
our  artificial  automata  is  entirely  different.  Here  the  actual  practice,  which 
has  the  consensus  of  all  experts  of  the  field,  is  somewhat  like  this:  Every 
effort  is  made  to  detect  (by  mathematical  or  by  automatical  checks)  every 
error  as  soon  as  it  occurs.  Then  an  attempt  is  made  to  isolate  the  com 
ponent  that  caused  the  error  as  rapidly  as  feasible.  This  may  be  done 
partly  automatically,  but  in  any  case  a  significant  part  of  this  diagnosis 
must  be  effected  by  intervention  from  the  outside.  Once  the  faulty  com 
ponent  has  been  identified,  it  is  immediately  corrected  or  replaced. 

Note  the  difference  in  these  two  attitudes.  The  basic  principle  of  deal 
ing  with  malfunctions  in  nature  is  to  make  their  effect  as  unimportant  as 
possible  and  to  apply  correctives,  if  they  are  necessary  at  all,  at  leisure.  In 
our  dealings  with  artificial  automata,  on  the  other  hand,  we  require  an 
immediate  diagnosis.  Therefore,  we  are  trying  to  arrange  the  automata  in 
such  a  manner  that  errors  will  become  as  conspicuous  as  possible,  and 
intervention  and  correction  follow  immediately.  In  other  words,  natural 
organisms  are  constructed  to  make  errors  as  inconspicuous,  as  harmless, 
as  possible.  Artificial  automata  are  designed  to  make  errors  as  conspicuous, 
as  disastrous,  as  possible.  The  rationale  of  this  difference  is  not  far  to  seek. 
Natural  organisms  are  sufficiently  well  conceived  to  be  able  to  operate 
even  when  malfunctions  have  set  in.  They  can  operate  in  spite  of  malfunc 
tions,  and  their  subsequent  tendency  is  to  remove  these  malfunctions.  An 
artificial  automaton  could  certainly  be  designed  so  as  to  be  able  to  operate 
normally  in  spite  of  a  limited  number  of  malfunctions  in  certain  limited 
areas.  Any  malfunction,  however,  represents  a  considerable  risk  that  some 
generally  degenerating  process  has  already  set  in  within  the  machine.  It 
is,  therefore,  necessary  to  intervene  immediately,  because  a  machine  which 
has  begun  to  malfunction  has  only  rarely  a  tendency  to  restore  itself,  and. 
will  more  probably  go  from  bad  to  worse.  All  of  this  comes  back  to  one 
thing.  With  our  artificial  automata  we  are  moving  much  more  in  the  dark 
than  nature  appears  to  be  with  its  organisms.  We  are,  and  apparently,  at 
least  at  present,  have  to  be,  much  more  "scared"  by  the  occurrence  of  an 
isolated  error  and  by  the  malfunction  which  must  be  behind  it.  Our  be 
havior  is  clearly  that  of  overcaution,  generated  by  ignorance. 

The  Single-Error  Principle.  A  minor  side  light  to  this  is  that  almost  all 
our  error-diagnosing  techniques  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  the 
machine  contains  only  one  faulty  component.  In  this  case,  iterative  sub- 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2087 

divisions  of  the  machine  into  parts  permit  us  to  determine  which  portion 
contains  the  fault.  As  soon  as  the  possibility  exists  that  the  machine  may 
contain  several  faults,  these,  rather  powerful,  dichotomic  methods  of  diag 
nosis  are  lost.  Error  diagnosing  then  becomes  an  increasingly  hopeless 
proposition.  The  high  premium  on  keeping  the  number  of  errors  to  be 
diagnosed  down  to  one,  or  at  any  rate  as  low  as  possible,  again  illustrates 
our  ignorance  in  this  field,  and  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  errors  must 
be  made  as  conspicuous  as  possible,  in  order  to  be  recognized  and  appre 
hended  as  soon  after  their  occurrence  as  feasible,  that  is,  before  further 
errors  have  had  time  to  develop. 


PRINCIPLES  OF  DIGITALIZATION 

Digitalization  of  Continuous  Quantities:  the  Digital  Expansion  Method 
and  the  Counting  Method.  Consider  the  digital  part  of  a  natural  organism; 
specifically,  consider  the  nervous  system.  It  seems  that  we  are  indeed 
justified  in  assuming  that  this  is  a  digital  mechanism,  that  it  transmits 
messages  which  are  made  up  of  signals  possessing  the  all-or-none  char 
acter.  (See  also  the  earlier  discussion,  page  2078.)  In  other  words,  each 
elementary  signal,  each  impulse,  simply  either  is  or  is  not  there,  with  no 
further  shadings.  A  particularly  relevant  illustration  of  this  fact  is  fur 
nished  by  those  cases  where  the  underlying  problem  has  the  opposite  char 
acter,  that  is,  where  the  nervous  system  is  actually  called  upon  to  transmit 
a  continuous  quantity.  Thus  the  case  of  a  nerve  which  has  to  report  on 
the  value  of  a  pressure  is  characteristic. 

Assume,  for  example,  that  a  pressure  (clearly  a  continuous  quantity)  is 
to  be  transmitted.  It  is  well  known  how  this  trick  is  done.  The  nerve  which 
does  it  still  transmits  nothing  but  individual  all-or-none  impulses.  How 
does  it  then  express  the  continuously  numerical  value  of  pressure  in  terms 
of  these  impulses,  that  is,  of  digits?  In  other  words,  how  does  it  encode  a 
continuous  number  into  a  digital  notation?  It  does  certainly  not  do  it  by 
expanding  the  number  in  question  into  decimal  (or  binary,  or  any  other 
base)  digits  in  the  conventional  sense.  What  appears  to  happen  is  that  it 
transmits  pulses  at  a  frequency  which  varies  and  which  is  within  certain 
limits  proportional  to  the  continuous  quantity  in  question,  and  generally  a 
monotone  function  of  it.  The  mechanism  which  achieves  this  "encoding" 
is,  therefore,  essentially  a  frequency  modulation  system. 

The  details  are  known.  The  nerve  has  a  finite  recovery  time.  In  other 
words,  after  it  has  been  pulsed  once,  the  time  that  has  to  lapse  before 
another  stimulation  is  possible  is  finite  and  dependent  upon  the  strength 
of  the  ensuing  (attempted)  stimulation.  Thus,  if  the  nerve  is  under  the 
influence  of  a  continuing  stimulus  (one  which  is  uniformly  present  at  all 
times,  like  the  pressure  that  is  being  considered  here),  then  the  nerve  will 


„.--  John  von  Neumann 

2088 

respond  periodically,  and  the  length  of  the  period  between  two  successive 
stimulations  is  the  recovery  time  referred  to  earlier,  that  is,  a  function  of 
the  strength  of  the  constant  stimulus  (the  pressure  in  the  present  case). 
Thus,  under  a  high  pressure,  the  nerve  may  be  able  to  respond  every  8 
milliseconds,  that  is,  transmit  at  the  rate  of  125  impulses  per  second;  while 
under  the  influence  of  a  smaller  pressure  it  may  be  able  to  repeat  only 
every  14  milliseconds,  that  is,  transmit  at  the  rate  of  71  times  per  second. 
This  is  very  clearly  the  behavior  of  a  genuinely  yes-or-no  organ,  of  a 
digital  organ.  It  is  very  instructive,  however,  that  it  uses  a  "count"  rather 
than  a  "decimal  expansion"  (or  "binary  expansion,"  etc.)  method. 

Comparison  of  the  Two  Methods.  The  Preference  of  Living  Organisms 
for  the  Counting  Method.  Compare  the  merits  and  demerits  of  these  two 
methods.  The  counting  method  is  certainly  less  efficient  than  the  expan 
sion  method.  In  order  to  express  a  number  of  about  a  million  (that  is,  a 
physical  quantity  of  a  million  distinguishable  resolution-steps)  by  count 
ing,  a  million  pulses  have  to  be  transmitted.  In  order  to  express  a  number 
of  the  same  size  by  expansion,  6  or  7  decimal  digits  are  needed,  that  is, 
about  20  binary  digits.  Hence,  in  this  case  only  20  pulses  are  needed. 
Thus  our  expansion  method  is  much  more  economical  in  notation  than 
the  counting  methods  which  are  resorted  to  by  nature.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  counting  method  has  a  high  stability  and  safety  from  error.  If  you 
express  a  number  of  the  order  of  a  million  by  counting  and  miss  a  count, 
the  result  is  only  irrelevantly  changed.  If  you  express  it  by  (decimal  or 
binary)  expansion,  a  single  error  in  a  single  digit  may  vitiate  the  entire 
result.  Thus  the  undesirable  trait  of  our  computing  machines  reappears 
in  our  digital  expansion  system,  in  fact,  the  former  is  clearly  deeply  con 
nected  with,  and  partly  a  consequence  of,  the  latter.  The  high  stability 
and  nearly  error-proof  character  of  natural  organisms,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  reflected  in  the  counting  method  that  they  seem  to  use  in  this  case.  All 
of  this  reflects  a  general  rule.  You  can  increase  the  safety  from  error  by 
a  reduction  of  the  efficiency  of  the  notation,  or,  to  say  it  positively,  by 
allowing  redundancy  of  notation.  Obviously,  the  simplest  form  of  achiev 
ing  safety  by  redundancy  is  to  use  the,  per  se,  quite  unsafe  digital  expan 
sion  notation,  but  to  repeat  every  such  message  several  times.  In  the  case 
under  discussion,  nature  has  obviously  resorted  to  an  even  more  redun 
dant  and  even  safer  system. 

There  are,  of  course,  probably  other  reasons  why  the  nervous  system 
uses  the  counting  rather  than  the  digital  expansion.  The  encoding-decoding 
facilities  required  by  the  former  are  much  simpler  than  those  required  by 
the  latter.  It  is  true,  however,  that  nature  seems  to  be  willing  and  able  to 
go  much  further  in  the  direction  of  complication  than  we  are,  or  rather 
than  we  can  afford  to  go.  One  may,  therefore,  suspect  that  if  the  only 
demerit  of  the  digital  expansion  system  were  its  greater  logical  complexity, 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2089 

nature  would  not,  for  this  reason  alone,  have  rejected  it.  It  is,  nevertheless, 
true  that  we  have  nowhere  an  indication  of  its  use  in  natural  organisms. 
It  is  difficult  to  tell  how  much  "final"  validity  one  should  attach  to  this 
observation.  The  point  deserves  at  any  rate  attention,  and  should  receive 
it  in  future  investigations  of  the  functioning  of  the  nervous  system. 


FORMAL  NEURAL  NETWORKS 

The  McCulloch-Pitts  Theory  of  Formal  Neural  Networks.  A  great  deal 
more  could  be  said  about  these  things  from  the  logical  and  the  organiza 
tional  point  of  view,  but  I  shall  not  attempt  to  say  it  here.  I  shall  instead 
go  on  to  discuss  what  is  probably  the  most  significant  result  obtained  with 
the  axiomatic  method  up  to  now.  I  mean  the  remarkable  theorems  of  Mc- 
Culloch  and  Pitts  on  the  relationship  of  logics  and  neural  networks. 

In  this  discussion  I  shall,  as  I  have  said,  take  the  strictly  axiomatic 
point  of  view.  I  shall,  therefore,  view  a  neuron  as  a  "black  box"  with  a 
certain  number  of  inputs  that  receive  stimuli  and  an  output  that  emits 
stimuli.  To  be  specific,  I  shall  assume  that  the  input  connections  of  each 
one  of  these  can  be  of  two  types,  excitatory  and  inhibitory.  The  boxes 
themselves  are  also  of  two  types,  threshold  1  and  threshold  2.  These  con 
cepts  are  linked  and  circumscribed  by  the  following  definitions.  In  order 
to  stimulate  such  an  organ  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  receive  simultane 
ously  at  least  as  many  stimuli  on  its  excitatory  inputs  as  correspond  to  its 
threshold,  and  not  a  single  stimulus  on  any  one  of  its  inhibitory  inputs.  If 
it  has  been  thus  stimulated,  it  will  after  a  definite  time  delay  (which  is 
assumed  to  be  always  the  same,  and  may  be  used  to  define  the  unit  of 
time)  emit  an  output  pulse.  This  pulse  can  be  taken  by  appropriate  con 
nections  to  any  number  of  inputs  of  other  neurons  (also  to  any  of  its  own 
inputs)  and  will  produce  at  each  of  these  the  same  type  of  input  stimulus 
as  the  ones  described  above. 

It  is,  of  course,  understood  that  this  is  an  oversimplification  of  the 
actual  functioning  of  a  neuron.  I  have  already  discussed  the  character,  the 
limitations,  and  the  advantages  of  the  axiomatic  method.  (See  pages  2071 
and  2078.)  They  all  apply  here,  and  the  discussion  which  follows  is  to  be 
taken  in  this  sense. 

McCulloch  and  Pitts  have  used  these  units  to  build  up  complicated 
networks  which  may  be  called  "formal  neural  networks."  Such  a  system 
is  built  up  of  any  number  of  these  units,  with  their  inputs  and  outputs 
suitably  interconnected  with  arbitrary  complexity.  The  "functioning"  of 
such  a  network  may  be  defined  by  singling  out  some  of  the  inputs  of  the 
entire  system  and  some  of  its  outputs,  and  then  describing  what  original 
stimuli  on  the  former  are  to  cause  what  ultimate  stimuli  on  the  latter, 

The  Main  Result  of  the  McCulloch-Pitts  Theory.  McCulloch  and  Pitts' 


_Artrt  John  von  Neumann 

2090 

important  result  is  that  any  functioning  in  this  sense  which  can  be  defined 
at  all  logically,  strictly,  and  unambiguously  in  a  finite  number  of  words 
can  also  be  realized  by  such  a  formal  neural  network. 

It  is  well  to  pause  at  this  point  and  to  consider  what  the  implications 
are.  It  has  often  been  claimed  that  the  activities  and  functions  of  the 
human  nervous  system  are  so  complicated  that  no  ordinary  mechanism 
could  possibly  perform  them.  It  has  also  been  attempted  to  name  specific 
functions  which  by  their  nature  exhibit  this  limitation.  It  has  been  at 
tempted  to  show  that  such  specific  functions,  logically,  completely 
described,  are  per  se  unable  of  mechanical,  neural  realization.  The 
McCulloch-Pitts  result  puts  an  end  to  this.  It  proves  that  anything  that 
can  be  exhaustively  and  unambiguously  described,  anything  that  can  be 
completely  and  unambiguously  put  into  words,  is  ipso  facto  realizable  by 
a  suitable  finite  neural  network.  Since  the  converse  statement  is  obvious, 
we  can  therefore  say  that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  possibility  of 
describing  a  real  or  imagined  mode  of  behavior  completely  and  unambigu 
ously  in  words,  and  the  possibility  of  realizing  it  by  a  finite  formal  neural 
network.  The  two  concepts  are  co-extensive.  A  difficulty  of  principle 
embodying  any  mode  of  behavior  in  such  a  network  can  exist  only  if  we 
are  also  unable  to  describe  that  behavior  completely. 

Thus  the  remaining  problems  are  these  two.  First,  if  a  certain  mode  of 
behavior  can  be  effected  by  a  finite  neural  network,  the  question  still 
remains  whether  that  network  can  be  realized  within  a  practical  size, 
specifically,  whether  it  will  fit  into  the  physical  limitations  of  the  organism 
in  question.  Second,  the  question  arises  whether  every  existing  mode  of 
behavior  can  really  be  put  completely  and  unambiguously  into  words. 

The  first  problem  is,  of  course,  the  ultimate  problem  of  nerve  physiol 
ogy,  and  I  shall  not  attempt  to  go  into  it  any  further  here.  The  second 
question  is  of  a  different  character,  and  it  has  interesting  logical  con 
notations. 

Interpretations  of  This  Result.  There  is  no  doubt  that  any  special  phase 
of  any  conceivable  form  of  behavior  can  be  described  "completely  and 
unambiguously"  in  words.  This  description  may  be  lengthy,  but  it  is  always 
possible.  To  deny  it  would  amount  to  adhering  to  a  form  of  logical  mysti 
cism  which  is  surely  far  from  most  of  us.  It  is,  however,  an  important 
limitation,  that  this  applies  only  to  every  element  separately,  and  it  is  far 
from  clear  how  it  will  apply  to  the  entire  syndrome  of  behavior.  To  be 
more  specific,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  describing  how  an  organism  might 
be  able  to  identify  any  two  rectilinear  triangles,  which  appear  on  the 
retina,  as  belonging  to  the  same  category  "triangle."  There  is  also  no  diffi 
culty  in  adding  to  this,  that  numerous  other  objects,  besides  regularly 
drawn  rectilinear  triangles,  will  also  be  classified  and  identified  as  triangles 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2091 

— triangles  whose  sides  are  curved,  triangles  whose  sides  are  not  fully 
drawn,  triangles  that  are  indicated  merely  by  a  more  or  less  homogeneous 
shading  of  their  interior,  etc.  The  more  completely  we  attempt  to  describe 
everything  that  may  conceivably  fall  under  this  heading,  the  longer  the 
description  becomes.  We  may  have  a  vague  and  uncomfortable  feeling 
that  a  complete  catalogue  along  such  lines  would  not  only  be  exceedingly 
long,  but  also  unavoidably  indefinite  at  its  boundaries.  Nevertheless,  this 
may  be  a  possible  operation. 

All  of  this,  however,  constitutes  only  a  small  fragment  of  the  more 
general  concept  of  identification  of  analogous  geometrical  entities.  This, 
in  turn,  is  only  a  microscopic  piece  of  the  general  concept  of  analogy. 
Nobody  would  attempt  to  describe  and  define  within  any  practical  amount 
of  space  the  general  concept  of  analogy  which  dominates  our  interpreta 
tion  of  vision.  There  is  no  basis  for  saying  whether  such  an  enterprise 
would  require  thousands  or  millions  or  altogether  impractical  numbers  of 
volumes.  Now  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  the  simplest  and  only  practical 
way  actually  to  say  what  constitutes  a  visual  analogy  consists  in  giving  a 
description  of  the  connections  of  the  visual  brain.  We  are  dealing  here 
with  parts  of  logics  with  which  we  have  practically  no  past  experience. 
The  order  of  complexity  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  anything  we  have  ever 
known.  We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  the  logical  notations  and  proce 
dures  used  in  the  past  are  suited  to  this  part  of  the  subject.  It  is  not  at  all 
certain  that  in  this  domain  a  real  object  might  not  constitute  the  simplest 
description  of  itself,  that  is,  any  attempt  to  describe  it  by  the  usual  literary 
or  formal-logical  method  may  lead  to  something  less  manageable  and 
more  involved.  In  fact,  some  results  in  modern  logic  would  tend  to  indi 
cate  that  phenomena  like  this  have  to_be  expected  when  we  come  to  really 
complicated  entities.  It  is,  therefore,  not  at  all  unlikely  that  it  is  futile  to 
look  for  a  precise  logical  concept,  that  is,  for  a  precise  verbal  description, 
of  "visual  analogy."  It  is  possible  that  the  connection  pattern  of  the  visual 
brain  itself  is  the  simplest  logical  expression  or  definition  of  this  principle. 

Obviously,  there  is  on  this  level  no  more  profit  in  the  McCulloch-Pitts 
result.  At  this  point  it  only  furnishes  another  illustration  of  the  situation 
outlined  earlier.  There  is  an  equivalence  between  logical  principles  and 
their  embodiment  in  a  neural  network,  and  while  in  the  simpler  cases  the 
principles  might  furnish  a  simplified  expression  of  the  network,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  in  cases  of  extreme  complexity  the  reverse  is  true. 

All  of  this  does  not  alter  my  belief  that  a  new,  essentially  logical,  theory 
is  called  for  in  order  to  understand  high-complication  automata  and,  in 
particular,  the  central  nervous  system.  It  may  be,  however,  that  in  this 
process  logic  will  have  to  undergo  a  pseudomorphosis  to  neurology  to  a 
much  greater  extent  than  the  reverse.  The  foregoing  analysis  shows  that 


^    ^  John  von  Neumann 

2092 

one  of  the  relevant  things  we  can  do  at  this  moment  with  respect  to  the 
theory  of  the  central  nervous  system  is  to  point  out  the  directions  in  which 
the  real  problem  does  not  lie. 


THE  CONCEPT  OF  COMPLICATION;   SELF-REPRODUCTION 

The  Concept  of  Complication.  The  discussions  so  far  have  shown  that 
high  complexity  plays  an  important  role  in  any  theoretical  effort  relating 
to  automata,  and  that  this  concept,  in  spite  of  its  prima  facie  quantitative 
character,  may  in  fact  stand  for  something  qualitative— for  a  matter  of 
principle.  For  the  remainder  of  my  discussion  I  will  consider  a  remoter 
implication  of  this  concept,  one  which  makes  one  of  the  qualitative  aspects 
of  its  nature  even  more  explicit. 

There  is  a  very  obvious  trait,  of  the  "vicious  circle"  type,  in  nature,  the 
simplest  expression  of  which  is  the  fact  that  very  complicated  organisms 
can  reproduce  themselves. 

We  are  all  inclined  to  suspect  in  a  vague  way  the  existence  of  a  concept 
of  "complication."  This  concept  and  its  putative  properties  have  never 
been  clearly  formulated.  We  are,  however,  always  tempted  to  assume  that 
they  will  work  in  this  way.  When  an  automaton  performs  certain  opera 
tions,  they  must  be  expected  to  be  of  a  lower  degree  of  complication  than 
the  automaton  itself.  In  particular,  if  an  automaton  has  the  ability  to 
construct  another  one,  there  must  be  a  decrease  in  complication  as  we  go 
from  the  parent  to  the  construct.  That  is,  if  A  can  produce  5,  then  A  in 
some  way  must  have  contained  a  complete  description  of  B.  In  order  to 
make  it  effective,  there  must  be,  furthermore,  various  arrangements  in  A 
that  see  to  it  that  this  description  is  interpreted  and  that  the  constructive 
operations  that  it  calls  for  are  carried  out,  In  this  sense,  it  would  therefore 
seem  that  a  certain  degenerating  tendency  must  be  expected,  some  de 
crease  in  complexity  as  one  automaton  makes  another  automaton. 

Although  this  has  some  indefinite  plausibility  to  it,  it  is  in  clear  contra 
diction  with  the  most  obvious  things  that  go  on  in  nature.  Organisms 
reproduce  themselves,  that  is,  they  produce  new  organisms  with  no  de 
crease  in  complexity.  In  addition,  there  are  long  periods  of  evolution 
during  which  the  complexity  is  even  increasing.  Organisms  are  indirectly 
derived  from  others  which  had  lower  complexity. 

Thus  there  exists  an  apparent  conflict  of  plausibility  and  evidence,  if 
nothing  worse.  In  view  of  this,  it  seems  worth  while  to  try  to  see  whether 
there  is  anything  involved  here  which  can  be  formulated  rigorously. 

So  far  I  have  been  rather  vague  and  confusing,  and  not  unintentionally 
at  that.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  otherwise  impossible  to  give  a  fair 
impression  of  the  situation  that  exists  here.  Let  me  now  try  to  become 
specific. 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2093 

Turing's  Theory  of  Computing  Automata.  The  English  logician,  Turing, 
about  twelve  years  ago  attacked  the  following  problem. 

He  wanted  to  give  a  general  definition  of  what  is  meant  by  a  computing 
automaton.  The  formal  definition  came  out  as  follows: 

An  automaton  is  a  "black  box,"  which  will  not  be  described  in  detail 
but  is  expected  to  have  the  following  attributes.  It  possesses  a  finite  num 
ber  of  states,  which  need  be  prima  facie  characterized  only  by  stating  their 
number,  say  n,  and  by  enumerating  them  accordingly:  1,  2,  •  •  •,  n.  The 
essential  operating  characteristic  of  the  automaton  consists  of  describing 
how  it  is  caused  to  change  its  state,  that  is,  to  go  over  from  a  state  i  into  a 
state  /'.  This  change  requires  some  interaction  with  the  outside  world, 
which  will  be  standardized  in  the  following  manner.  As  far  as  the  machine 
is  concerned,  let  the  whole  outside  world  consist  of  a  long  paper  tape.  Let 
this  tape  be,  say,  1  inch  wide,  and  let  it  be  subdivided  into  fields  (squares) 
1  inch  long.  On  each  field  of  this  strip  we  may  or  may  not  put  a  sign, 
say,  a  dot,  and  it  is  assumed  that  it  is  possible  to  erase  as  well  as  to  write 
in  such  a  dot.  A  field  marked  with  a  dot  will  be  called  a  "1,"  a  field 
unmarked  with  a  dot  will  be  called  a  "0."  (We  might  permit  more  ways 
of  marking,  but  Turing  showed  that  this  is  irrelevant  and  does  not  lead  to 
any  essential  gain  in  generality.)  In  describing  the  position  of  the  tape 
relative  to  the  automaton  it  is  assumed  that  one  particular  field  of  the  tape 
is  under  direct  inspection  by  the  automaton,  and  that  the  automaton  has 
the  ability  to  move  the  tape  forward  and  backward,  say,  by  one  field  at  a 
time.  In  specifying  this,  let  the  automaton  be  in  the  state  /(=!••-,«), 
and  let  it  see  on  the  tape  an  e  (=  0,  1) .  It  will  then  go  over  into  the  state 
/  (=  0,  1,  •  •  •,  n),  move  the  tape  by  p  fields  (p  —  0,  +1,  — 1;  +1  is  a 
move  forward,  —1  is  a  move  backward),  and  inscribe  into  the  new  field 
that  it  sees  /  (=0,  1;  inscribing  0  means  erasing;  inscribing  1  means  put 
ting  in  a  dot) .  Specifying  7,  p,  f  as  functions  of  i,  e  is  then  the  complete 
definition  of  the  functioning  of  such  an  automaton. 

Turing  carried  out  a  careful  analysis  of  what  mathematical  processes 
can  be  effected  by  automata  of  this  type.  In  this  connection  he  proved 
various  theorems  concerning  the  classical  "decision  problem"  of  logic, 
but  I  shall  not  go  into  these  matters  here.  He  did,  however,  also  introduce 
and  analyze  the  concept  of  a  "universal  automaton,"  and  this  is  part  of 
the  subject  that  is  relevant  in  the  present  context. 

An  infinite  sequence  of  digits  e  (=0,  1)  is  one  of  the  basic  entities  in 
mathematics.  Viewed  as  a  binary  expansion,  it  is  essentially  equivalent  to 
the  concept  of  a  real  number.  Turing,  therefore,  based  his  consideration 
on  these  sequences. 

He  investigated  the  question  as  to  which  automata  were  able  to  con 
struct  which  sequences.  That  is,  given  a  definite  law  for  the  formation  of 
such  a  sequence,  he  inquired  as  to  which  automata  can  be  used  to  form 


John  von  Neumann 

the  sequence  based  on  that  law.  The  process  of  "forming"  a  sequence  is 
interpreted  in  this  manner.  An  automaton  is  able  to  "form"  a  certain 
sequence  if  it  is  possible  to  specify  a  finite  length  of  tape,  appropriately 
marked,  so  that,  if  this  tape  is  fed  to  the  automaton  in  question,  the 
automaton  will  thereupon  write  the  sequence  on  the  remaining  (infinite) 
free  portion  of  the  tape.  This  process  of  writing  the  infinite  sequence  is, 
of  course,  an  indefinitely  continuing  one.  What  is  meant  is  that  the  autom 
aton  will  keep  running  indefinitely  and,  given  a  sufficiently  long  time,  will 
have  inscribed  any  desired  (but  of  course  finite)  part  of  the  (infinite) 
sequence.  The  finite,  premarked,  piece  of  tape  constitues  the  "instruction" 
of  the  automaton  for  this  problem. 

An  automaton  is  "universal"  if  any  sequence  that  can  be  produced  by 
any  automaton  at  all  can  also  be  solved  by  this  particular  automaton.  It 
will,  of  course,  require  in  general  a  different  instruction  for  this  purpose. 

The  Main  Result  of  the  Turing  Theory.  We  might  expect  a  priori  that 
this  is  impossible.  How  can  there  be  an  automaton  which  is  at  least  as 
effective  as  any  conceivable  automaton,  including,  for  example,  one  of 
twice  its  size  and  complexity? 

Turing,  nevertheless,  proved  that  this  is  possible.  While  his  construction 
is  rather  involved,  the  underlying  principle  is  nevertheless  quite  simple. 
Turing  observed  that  a  completely  general  description  of  any  conceivable 
automaton  can  be  (in  the  sense  of  the  foregoing  definition)  given  in  a 
finite  number  of  words.  This  description  will  contain  certain  empty 
passages — those  referring  to  the  functions  mentioned  earlier  (/',  p,  f  in 
terms  of  i,  e)t  which  specify  the  actual  functioning  of  the  automaton. 
When  these  empty  passages  are  filled  in,  we  deal  with  a  specific  automa 
ton.  As  long  as  they  are  left  empty,  this  schema  represents  the  general 
definition  of  the  general  automaton.  Now  it  becomes  possible  to  describe 
an  automaton  which  has  the  ability  to  interpret  such  a  definition.  In  other 
words,  which,  when  fed  the  functions  that  in  the  sense  described  above 
define  a  specific  automaton,  will  thereupon  function  like  the  object  de 
scribed.  The  ability  to  do  this  is  no  more  mysterious  than  the  ability  to 
read  a  dictionary  and  a  grammar  and  to  follow  their  instructions  about  the 
uses  and  principles  of  combinations  of  words.  This  automaton,  which  is 
constructed  to  read  a  description  and  to  imitate  the  object  described,  is 
then  the  universal  automaton  in  the  sense  of  Turing.  To  make  it  duplicate 
any  operation  that  any  other  automaton  can  perform,  it  suffices  to  furnish 
it  with  a  description  of  the  automaton  in  question  and,  in  addition,  with 
the  instructions  which  that  device  would  have  required  for  the  operation 
under  consideration. 

Broadening  of  the  Program  to  Deal  with  Automata  That  Produce 
Automata.  For  the  question  which  concerns  me  here,  that  of  "self-repro 
duction"  of  automata,  Turing's  procedure  is  too  narrow  in  one  respect 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata  2095 

only.  His  automata  are  purely  computing  machines.  Their  output  is  a 
piece  of  tape  with  zeros  and  ones  on  it.  What  is  needed  for  the  construc 
tion  to  which  I  referred  is  an  automaton  whose  output  is  other  automata. 
There  is,  however,  no  difficulty  in  principle  in  dealing  with  this  broader 
concept  and  in  deriving  from  it  the  equivalent  of  Turing's  result. 

The  Basic  Definitions.  As  in  the  previous  instance,  it  is  again  of  primary 
importance  to  give  a  rigorous  definition  of  what  constitutes  an  automaton 
for  the  purpose  of  the  investigation.  First  of  all,  we  have  to  draw  up  a 
:omplete  list  of  the  elementary  parts  to  be  used.  This  list  must  contain  not 
3nly  a  complete  enumeration  but  also  a  complete  operational  definition  of 
?ach  elementary  part.  It  is  relatively  easy  to  draw  up  such  a  list,  that  is,  to 
rate  a  catalogue  of  "machine  parts"  which  is  sufficiently  inclusive  to 
permit  the  construction  of  the  wide  variety  of  mechanisms  here  required, 
ind  which  has  the  axiomatic  rigor  that  is  needed  for  this  kind  of  consider- 
ition.  The  list  need  not  be  very  long  either.  It  can,  of  course,  be  made 
jither  arbitrarily  long  or  arbitrarily  short.  It  may  be  lengthened  by  includ- 
ng  in  it,  as  elementary  parts,  things  which  could  be  achieved  by  combina- 
ions  of  others.  It  can  be  made  short — in  fact,  it  can  be  made  to  consist  of 
i  single  unit — by  endowing  each  elementary  part  with  a  multiplicity  of 
ittributes  and  functions.  Any  statement  on  the  number  of  elementary 
>arts  required  will  therefore  represent  a  common-sense  compromise,  in 
vhich  nothing  too  complicated  is  expected  from  any  one  elementary  part, 
ind  no  elementary  part  is  made  to  perform  several,  obviously  separate, 
unctions.  In  this  sense,  it  can  be  shown  that  about  a  dozen  elementary 
>arts  suffice.  The  problem  of  self-reproduction  can  then  be  stated  like  this: 
Dan  one  build  an  aggregate  out  of  such  elements  in  such  a  manner  that  if 
t  is  put  into  a  reservoir,  in  which  there  float  all  these  elements  in  large 
lumbers,  it  will  then  begin  to  construct  other  aggregates,  each  of  which 
rill  at  the  end  turn  out  to  be  another  automaton  exactly  like  the  original 
>ne?  This  is  feasible,  and  the  principle  on  which  it  can  be  based  is  closely 
elated  to  Turing's  principle  outlined  earlier. 

Outline  of  the  Derivation  of  the  Theorem  Regarding  Self-reproduction. 
7irst  of  all,  it  is  possible  to  give  a  complete  description  of  everything 
hat  is  an  automaton  in  the  sense  considered  here.  This  description  is  to 
>e  conceived  as  a  general  one,  that  is,  it  will  again  contain  empty  spaces. 
These  empty  spaces  have  to  be  filled  in  with  the  functions  which  describe 
he  actual  structure  of  an  automaton.  As  before,  the  difference  between 
tiese  spaces  filled  and  unfilled  is  the  difference  between  the  description  of 

specific  automaton  and  the  general  description  of  a  general  automaton, 
'here  is  no  difficulty  of  principle  in  describing  the  following  automata. 

(a)  Automaton  A,  which  when  furnished  the  description  of  any  other 
utomaton  in  terms  of  appropriate  functions,  will  construct  that  entity, 
"he  description  should  in  this  case  not  be  given  in  the  form  of  a  marked 


John  von  Neumann 


2096 

tape,  as  in  Turing's  case,  because  we  will  not  normally  choose  a  tape  as  a 
structural  element.  It  is  quite  easy,  however,  to  describe  combinations 
of  structural  elements  which  have  all  the  notational  properties  of  a  tape 
with  fields  that  can  be  marked.  A  description  in  this  sense  will  be  called 
an  instruction  and  denoted  by  a  letter  /. 

"Constructing"  is  to  be  understood  in  the  same  sense  as  before.  The 
constructing  automaton  is  supposed  to  be  placed  in  a  reservoir  in  which 
all  elementary  components  in  large  numbers  are  floating,  and  it  will  effect 
its  construction  in  that  milieu.  One  need  not  worry  about  how  a  fixed 
automaton  of  this  sort  can  produce  others  which  are  larger  and  more 
complex  than  itself.  In  this  case  the  greater  size  and  the  higher  complexity 
of  the  object  to  be  constructed  will  be  reflected  in  a  presumably  still 
greater  size  of  the  instructions  /  that  have  to  be  furnished.  These  instruc 
tions,  as  pointed  out,  will  have  to  be  aggregates  of  elementary  parts.  In 
this  sense,  certainly,  an  entity  will  enter  the  process  whose  size  and  com 
plexity  is  determined  by  the  size  and  complexity  of  the  object  to  be 
constructed.  ^ 

In  what  follows,  all  automata  for  whose  construction  the  facility  A  will 
be  used  are  going  to  share  with  A  this  property.  All  of  them  will  have  a 
place  for  an  instruction  7,  that  is,  a  place  where  such  an  instruction  can 
be  inserted.  When  such  an  automaton  is  being  described  (as,  for  example, 
by  an  appropriate  instruction),  the  specification  of  the  location  for  the 
insertion  of  an  instruction  /  in  the  foregoing  sense  is  understood  to  form 
a  part  of  the  description.  We  may,  therefore,  talk  of  "inserting  a  given 
instruction  7  into  a  given  automaton,"  without  any  further  explanation. 

(b)  Automaton  #,  which  can  make  a  copy  of  any  instruction  7  that 
is  furnished  to  it.  7  is  an  aggregate  of  elementary  parts  in  the  sense  out 
lined  in  (a),  replacing  a  tape.  This  facility  will  be  used  when  7  furnishes 
a  description  of  another  automaton.  In  other  words,  this  automaton  is 
nothing  more  subtle  than  a  "reproducer" — the  machine  which  can  read  a 
punched  tape  and  produce  a  second  punched  tape  that  is  identical  with 
the  first.  Note  that  this  automaton,  too,  can  produce  objects  which  are 
larger  and  more  complicated  than  itself.  Note  again  that  there  is  nothing 
surprising  about  it.  Since  it  can  only  copy,  an  object  of  the  exact  size  and 
complexity  of  the  output  will  have  to  be  furnished  to  it  as  input. 

After  these  preliminaries,  we  can  proceed  to  the  decisive  step. 

(c)  Combine  the  automata  A  and  B  with  each  other,  and  with  a  con 
trol  mechanism  C  which  does  the  following.  Let  A  be  furnished  with  an 
instruction  7  (again  in  the  sense  of  [a]  and  [b]).  Then  C  will  first  cause  A 
to  construct  the  automaton  which  is  described  by  this  instruction  7.  Next 
C  will  cause  B  to  copy  the  instruction  7  referred  to  above,  and  insert  the 
copy  into  the  automaton  referred  to  above,  which  has  just  been  con- 


The  General  and  Logical  Theory  o1  Automata  2097 

structed  by  A.  Finally,  C  will  separate  this  construction  from  the  system 
A  +  B  +  C  and  "turn  it  loose"  as  an  independent  entity. 

(d)  Denote  the  total  aggregate  A  +  B  +  C  by  D. 

(e)  In  order  to  function,  the  aggregate  D  =  A  +  B  +  C  must  be  fur 
nished  with  an  instruction  7,  as  described  above.  This  instruction,  as 
pointed  out  above,  has  to  be  inserted  into  A .  Now  form  an  instruction  ID, 
which  describes  this  automaton  D,  and  insert  ID  into  A  within  D.  Call  the 
aggregate  which  now  results  E. 

E  is  clearly  self-reproductive.  Note  that  no  vicious  circle  is  involved. 
The  decisive  step  occurs  in  E,  when  the  instruction  ID,  describing  D,  is 
constructed  and  attached  to  D.  When  the  construction  (the  copying)  of 
ID  is  called  for,  D  exists  already,  and  it  is  in  no  wise  modified  by  the 
construction  of  ID.  ID  is  simply  added  to  form  E.  Thus  there  is  a  definite 
chronological  and  logical  order  in  which  D  and  ID  have  to  be  formed, 
and  the  process  is  legitimate  and  proper  according  to  the  rules  of  logic. 

Interpretations  of  This  Result  and  of  Its  Immediate  Extensions.  The 
description  of  this  automaton  E  has  some  further  attractive  sides,  into 
which  I  shall  not  go  at  this  time  at  any  length.  For  instance,  it  is  quite 
clear  that  the  instruction  ID  is  roughly  effecting  the  functions  of  a  gene. 
It  is  also  clear  that  the  copying  mechanism  B  performs  the  fundamental 
act  of  reproduction,  the  duplication  of  the  genetic  material,  which  is 
clearly  the  fundamental  operation  in  the  multiplication  of  living  cells.  It 
is  also  easy  to  see  how  arbitrary  alterations  of  the  system  E,  and  in  par 
ticular  of  /jr),  can  exhibit  certain  typical  traits  which  appear  in  connection 
with  mutation,  lethally  as  a  rule,  but  with  a  possibility  of  continuing 
reproduction  with  a  modification  of  traits.  It  is,  of  course,  equally  clear 
at  which  point  the  analogy  ceases  to  be  valid.  The  natural  gene  does  prob 
ably  not  contain  a  complete  description  of  the  object  whose  construction 
its  presence  stimulates.  It  probably  contains  only  general  pointers,  general 
cues.  In  the  generality  in  which  the  foregoing  consideration  is  moving, 
this  simplification  is  not  attempted.  It  is,  nevertheless,  clear  that  this 
simplification,  and  others  similar  to  it,  are  in  themselves  of  great  and 
qualitative  importance.  We  are  very  far  from  any  real  understanding  of 
the  natural  processes  if  we  do  not  attempt  to  penetrate  such  simplifying 
principles. 

Small  variations  of  the  foregoing  scheme  also  permit  us  to  construct 
automata  which  can  reproduce  themselves  and,  in  addition,  construct 
others.  (Such  an  automaton  performs  more  specifically  what  is  probably 
a — if  not  the — typical  gene  function,  self-reproduction  plus  production — 
or  stimulation  of  production — of  certain  specific  enzymes.)  Indeed,  It 
suffices  to  replace  the  ID  by  an  instruction  ID+F,  which  describes  the 
automaton  D  plus  another  given  automaton  F.  Let  D,  with  ID+F  inserted 


2098  John  von  Neumann 

into  A  within  it,  be  designated  by  EF.  This  EF  clearly  has  the  property 
already  described.  It  will  reproduce  itself,  and,  besides,  construct  F. 

Note  that  a  "mutation"  of  EF,  which  takes  place  within  the  F-part  of 
1D+F  in  EFt  is  not  lethal.  If  it  replaces  F  by  F',  it  changes  EF  into 
JEjP,  that  is,  the  "mutant"  is  still  self-reproductive;  but  its  by-product  is 
changed — F'  instead  of  F.  This  is,  of  course,  the  typical  non-lethal  mutant. 

All  these  are  very  crude  steps  in  the  direction  of  a  systematic  theory  of 
automata.  They  represent,  in  addition,  only  one  particular  direction.  This 
is,  as  I  indicated  before,  the  direction  towards  forming  a  rigorous  concept 
of  what  constitutes  "complication."  They  illustrate  that  "complication" 
on  its  lower  levels  is  probably  degenerative,  that  is,  that  every  automaton 
that  can  produce  other  automata  will  only  be  able  to  produce  less  compli 
cated  ones.  There  is,  however,  a  certain  minimum  level  where  this  degen 
erative  characteristic  ceases  to  be  universal.  At  this  point  automata  which 
can  reproduce  themselves,  or  even  construct  higher  entities,  become 
possible.  This  fact,  that  complication,  as  well  as  organization,  below  a 
certain  minimum  level  is  degenerative,  and  beyond  that  level  can  become 
self-supporting  and  even  increasing,  will  clearly  play  an  important  role  in 
any  future  theory  of  the  subject. 


Thinking  is  very  far  from  knowing.  — PROVERB 

Beware  when  the  great  God  lets  loose  a  thinker  on  this  planet.    — EMERSON 

For  'tis  the  sport