Translator’s Preface
vii
Preface to This New Edition
ix
Foreword
xi
Introduction
CHAPTER I
Introductory Considerations
1. The Origin of the Transformation Theory
2. The Original Formulations of Quantum Mechanics
3. The Equivalence of the Two Theories:
The Transformation Theory
4. The Equivalence of the Two Theories:
Hilbert Space
CHAPTER II
Abstract Hilbert Space
1. The Deﬁnition of Hilbert Space
2. The Geometry of Hilbert Space
3. Digression on the Conditions A-E
4. Closed Linear Manifolds
5. Operators in Hilbert Space
6. The Eigenvalue Problem
7. Continuation
8. Initial Considerations Concerning the Eigenvalue Problem
9. Digression on the Existence and Uniqueness of the
Solutions of the Eigenvalue Problem
10. Commutative Operators
11. The Trace
CHAPTER III
The Quantum Statistics
1. The Statistical Assertions of Quantum Mechanics
2. The Statistical Interpretation
3. Simultaneous Measurability and Measurability in General
4. Uncertainty Relations
5. Projections as Propositions
6. Radiation Theory


vi
CHAPTER IV
Deductive Development of the Theory
1. The Fundamental Basis of the Statistical Theory
2. Proof of the Statistical Formulas
3. Conclusions from Experiments
CHAPTER V
General Considerations
1. Measurement and Reversibility
2. Thermodynamic Considerations
3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
4. The Macroscopic Measurement
CHAPTER VI
The Measuring Process
1. Formulation of the Problem
2. Composite Systems
3. Discussion of the Measuring Process
Name Index
Subject Index
Locations of Flagged Propositions
Articles Cited: Details
Locations of the Footnotes


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
This translation follows closely the text of the original German edition.
The translated manuscript has been carefully revised by the author so that the
ideas expressed in this volume are his rather than those of the translator, and
any deviations from the original text are also due to the author.
The
translator
wishes
to
express
his
deep
gratitude
to
Professor
von Neumann for his very considerable eﬀorts in the rendering of the ideas of
the original volume into a translation which would convey the same meanings.
Robert T. Beyer
Providence, R. I.
December, 1949




PREFACE TO THIS NEW EDITION
This book is the realization of my long-held intention to someday use the
resources of TEX to produce a more easily read version of Robert T. Beyer’s
authorized English translation (Princeton University Press, 1955) of John von
Neumann’s classic Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik (Springer,
1932).
I have endeavored to correct typographic errors that crept into the text
and equations in the Beyer translation (a few of which were copied from the
German original) and to adjust some of the transliterated sentences so that
they read more easily and their meaning is easier to comprehend. But in all
other respects I have adhered as closely as possible to the Beyer translation,
which von Neumann reviewed and endorsed. Von Neumann wrote about his
own extensive contributions to the Beyer translation in a letter (3 October 1949)
addressed to Hayward Cirker, founding president of Dover Publications; that
letter is reproduced on pages 91–92 of Mikl´os R´edei’s John von Neumann:
Selected Letters (2005).
The gloriﬁed typewriter (VariTyper, circa 1945) that was used to prepare
the Beyer translation provided relatively few typographic resources, with the
consequences that some of the equations are very awkwardly displayed and it
is often not possible to know—except from context—the mathematical nature
of the object to which a given symbol refers. Additionally, some of the symbols
employed (for example, the German Gothic R,N and certain Roman fonts) are
diﬃcult to distinguish in small type sizes. To avoid such diﬃculties, I have
adopted the following invariable conventions:
• functions are denoted f, g, h, . . .
• linear manifolds are denoted A, B, C, . . . , R, S, . . . , M, N, . . .
• elements of linear manifolds are denoted φ, ψ, . . .
• physical quantities are denoted A, B, C, . . .
• operators are denoted A, B, C, . . . , E, . . . , P, Q, . . . , U, V
• matrices are denoted A, B, C, . . . , P, Q, . . .
• 3-vectors are denoted A,x,y, . . .
Where von Neumann invariably writes h/2π I employ Dirac’s (now universal)
symbol ℏ.
It is my impression that von Neumann’s monograph—which is today, after
more than eighty years, more frequently cited than ever before—is perhaps more
frequently cited than actually read, and is my certain knowledge that it contains


x
Preface to This New Edition
treasures and provides valuable insights that are too seldom appreciated. It is
my hope that this edition (to which I have attached a subject index, absent
from previous editions) will facilitate—and perhaps inspire—the work of a new
generation of physicists.
I thank especially Marina von Neumann Whitman, Freeman Dyson and
Peter Renz, and also Jeﬀrey Bub, Auletta Gennaro, David Griﬃths, David
Mermin, Mikl´os R´edei, Robert Rohmer, Maximilian Schlosshauer, Silvan
Schweber, Veeravalli Varadarajan, Thomas Wieting and Wojciech Zurek for
encouragement in this undertaking. I am greatly indebted to William Bialek
of the Princeton physics faculty for his initiative, and to Vickie Kearn for her
expert editorial supervision.
It is with special pleasure that I thank Linda
Maddux, Reed College science librarian, for assistance in preparation of the list
of works cited, Paul Forman and (especially) Harvey Leﬀfor editorial advice
and assistance. The project would never have come to completion but for the
wise counsel and ever-tactful patience of my attorney, William Drew, of Elliott,
Ostrander & Preston, P.C. And I am—as are we all—deeply indebted to Donald
Knuth for his invention of TEX.
This volume was written in Plain TEX, as implemented by Textures, an
application developed here in Portland by Blue Sky Research. Textures runs,
however, only on OSX systems old enough to provide Classic Mode, so the work
was done on a treasured antique of an iMac.
Nicholas Wheeler
Reed College
June, 2014


By way of a
FOREWORD
In 1933, John von Neumann [28 December 1903–8 February 1957 ]
became (together with Albert Einstein and Oswald Veblin) a member
of the founding faculty (and Kurt G¨odel a visiting member) of the
Institute for Advanced Study, where he remained for the remainder
of his life. The distinguished author of the following commemorative
essay was a member in 1949 and 1952–1954, and had then an
opportunity to become personally acquainted with von Neumann.
The essay was taken (with permission) from volume 64, number 3,
part 2 (May 1958) pages 95–99 of the Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, the 129-page entirety of which is given over
to expert surveys of von Neumann’s contributions to eight diﬀerent
subject areas.
VON NEUMANN’S CONTRIBUTIONS TO
QUANTUM THEORY
l´eon van hove
That von Neumann has been “par excellence” the mathematician of quantum
mechanics is as obvious to every physicist now as it was a quarter of a century
ago.
Quantum mechanics was very fortunate indeed to attract, in the very
ﬁrst years after its discovery in 1925, the interest of a mathematical genius of
von Neumann’s stature. As a result, the mathematical framework of the theory
was developed and the formal aspects of its entirely novel rules of interpretation
were analyzed by one single man in two years time (1927–1929). Conversely, one
could almost say in reciprocity, quantum mechanics introduced von Neumann
into a ﬁeld of mathematical investigation, operator theory, in which he achieved
some of his most prominent successes.
Von Neumann’s major contributions to quantum mechanics are his
development of the mathematical framework of the theory and his formal study
of quantum statistics, quantum measuring processes and their interrelations.
Whereas the latter study was essentially complete in 1927 (except for the
quantum ergodic theorem of 1929) the work on the mathematical foundations
of quantum mechanics came to its culmination in 1929 with the spectral theorem


Foreword
xii
for hypermaximal symmetric operators in Hilbert space.
In the next two
paragraphs we shall discuss these major contributions.
The mathematical framework of quantum theory.
By the time von Neumann
started his investigations on the formal framework of quantum mechanics this
theory was known in two diﬀerent mathematical formulations: the “matrix
mechanics” of Heisenberg, Born and Jordan, and the “wave mechanics” of
Schr¨odinger.
The mathematical equivalence of these formulations had been
established by Schr¨odinger, and they had both been embedded as special cases
in a general formalism, often called the “transformation theory,” developed by
Dirac and Jordan.
This formalism, however, was rather clumsy and it was
hampered by its reliance upon ill-deﬁned mathematical objects, the famous
delta-functions of Dirac and their derivatives. Although von Neumann himself
attempted at ﬁrst, in collaboration with Hilbert and Nordheim [1], to edify
the formalism along similar lines, he soon realized that a much more natural
framework was provided by the abstract, axiomatic theory of Hilbert spaces
and their linear operators [2].
This mathematical formulation of quantum
mechanics, whereby states of the physical system are described by Hilbert space
vectors and measurable quantities by Hermitian operators acting upon them,
has been very successful indeed. Unchanged in its essentials it has survived the
two great extensions which quantum theory was to undergo soon: the relativistic
quantum mechanics of particles (Dirac equation) and the quantum theory of
ﬁelds.
One might of course remark that Dirac’s delta functions and their
derivatives, although poorly deﬁned at the time of their introduction, have
been recognized since as bona ﬁde mathematical entities in L. Schwartz’ theory
of distributions.
This is quite true and moreover these functions have been
used continually by physicists throughout the development of quantum theory,
in particular in the last two decades for the study of scattering processes and
of quantized ﬁelds. Delta functions have established themselves as the natural
tool whenever operators with continuous spectra are to be considered. This
does not aﬀect in any way, however, the fact that the axiomatically deﬁned
separable Hilbert space is the suitable framework for the quantum-mechanical
formalism as we know it today, and the recognition of this fact we owe to
von Neumann.
An essential feature of the Hilbert space formulation of quantum theory is
that the most important physical quantities (such as position, momentum or
energy)are represented by unboundedHermitian operators. Since the theoretical
prediction of measurements makes essential use of the spectral resolution of the
operators representing the physical quantities, von Neumann was, in his very
ﬁrst invetigation [2], faced with the problem of extending to the unbounded
case the known spectral theory of bounded Hermitian operators.
By 1929
he had brought this problem to a complete solution [3].
He introduced the
all-important concept of hypermaximal symmetric operator, being the most
general Hermitian operator with a spectral resolution. This work, the results of
which were reached independently by M. H. Stone [4], was for von Neumann


Foreword
xiii
the start of a long series of investigations on linear operators in Hilbert space.
Still another contribution of von Neumann to the mathematical foundation
of quantum theory is worth mentioning here.
He established the important
theorem that (in the irreducible case and after a suitable reformulation) the
canonical commutation rules QjPℓ−PℓQj = ℏiδjℓdetermine the operators
Q1, . . . , Qn, P1, . . . , Pn uniquely except for an arbitrary transformation [5].
Although rarely quoted as such, this theorem, which was already known to Dirac
and Stone [6], is really fundamental for the understanding of many quantum-
mechanical investigations where the theoretical analysis is exclusively based on
the canonical commutation rules or in the equivalent ﬁeld-theoretical form
AjA∗
ℓ−A∗
ℓAj = ℏδjℓ,
2 Aj = Pj −iQj
Statistical aspects of quantum theory. In the course of his formulation ofquantum
mechanics in terms of vectors and operators of Hilbert space von Neumann also
gave in complete generality the basic statistical rule of interpretation of the
theory. This rule concerns the result of the measurement of a given physical
quantity on a system in a given quantum state and expresses its probability
distribution by means of a simple and now completely familiar formula involving
the vector representing the state and the spectral resolution of the operator
which represents the physical quantity [2]. This rule, originally proposed by
Born in 1926, was for von Neumann the starting point of a mathematical
analysis of quantum mechanics in entirely probabilistic terms. The analysis,
carried out in a paper of 1927 [7], introduced the concept of statistical matrix
for the description of an ensemble of systems which are not necessarily all in
the same quantum state.
The statistical matrix (now often called ρ-matrix
although von Neumann’s notation was U) has become one of the major tools
of quantum statistics and it is through this contribution that von Neumann’s
name became familiar to even the least mathematically minded physicists.
In the same paper von Neumann also investigates a problem which is still
now the subject of much discussion; viz., the theoretical description of the
quantum-mechanical measuring process and of the non-causal elements which
it involves.
Mathematically speaking von Neumann’s study of this delicate
question is quite elegant.
It provides a clear-cut formal framework for the
numerous
investigations
which
were
needed
to
clarify
physically
the
all-important implications of quantum phenomena for the nature of physical
measurements, the most important of which is Neils Bohr’s concept of
complementarity.
The results of the paper just discussed were immediately used by the author
to lay the foundation for quantum thermodynamics [8]. He gave the quantum
analogue
S = −ktr(ρ ln ρ),
ρ denotes a statistical matrix
of the well known classical formula for the entropy
S = −k
!
f ln fdω,
f denotes a distribution function in phase space.


Foreword
xiv
He further wrote down the density matrix for a canonical ensemble at
temperature T:
ρ = Z
–1 exp(−H/kT),
Z = tr
"
exp(−H/kT)
#
,
H being the Hamiltonian operator. Two years later von Neumann came back to
quantum thermodynamics with a contribution to a much more diﬃcult problem:
the formulation and proof of an ergodic theorem for quantum systems [9]. The
basic principle of this work is to deﬁne quantum analogues of cells in phase
space by considering sets of quantum states for which all macroscopic quantities
have given values with a certain inaccuracy. One further considers the unitary
transformation u relating these quantum states to the eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian. The ergodicity is then established for “almost every” value of the
transformation u. Although the latter restriction is a rather unsatisfactory one
from a physical standpont, one must consider von Neumann’s ergodic theorem
as one of the very few important contributions to a most diﬃcult subject which
even now is far from complete clariﬁcation.
Most of the work we have brieﬂy reviewed has been republished by the
author, in greatly expanded form, as a book which rapidly became and still is
the standard work on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics [10],
[and of which the present volume is an English translation]. Von Neumann
devoted in his book considerable attention to a point which had not been
discussed in the 1927 papers and which was later the subject of much
controversy. It is the question of the possible existence of “hidden variables,”
the consideration of which would eliminate the non-causal element involved in
the measurement process. Von Neumann could show that hidden parameters
with this property cannot exist if the basic structure of quantum theory is
retained. Although he mentioned the latter restriction explicitly,† his result is
often quoted without due reference to it, a fact which sometimes gave rise to
unjustiﬁed criticism in the many discussions devoted through the years to the
possibility of an entirely deterministic reformulation of quantum theory.
Other contributions. As von Neumann’s complete bibilography will reveal, he
wrote quite a few other papers on quantum mechanics, often in collaboration
with physicists, especially with Wigner. Most of these papers deal with technical
matters and the importance of the major contributions discussed above is so
eminent that, in comparison, the other papers’ scope is modest. There is only
one broad subject which we would like to mention here, because von Neumann,
obviously giving it considerable thought, returned to it several times in 1934
and 1936 (in collaboration with Jordan, Wigner and Garrett Birkhoﬀ). It is
the question of the algebraic and logical structure of quantum mechanics, where
the hope has existed to reach through abstract analysis possible generalizations
of the accepted theory. Nobody knows whether such a hope is justiﬁed, but it
is undoubtedly a natural one and it has appealed to many other people, giving
one more example of the power and originality of von Neumann’s thinking.
† See, e.g., [10], p. 109, line 17 et seq [or below: p. 132, paragraph 3].


Foreword
xv
references
1. D. Hilbert, J. von Neumann & L. Nordheim,
..
Uber die Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik,
Math. Ann. vol. 98 (1927) pp. 1–30.
2. J. von Neumann, Mathematische Begr¨undung der Quantenmechanik, Nachr. Ges. Wiss.
G¨ottingen (1927), pp. 1–57.
3. ———, Allgemeine Eigenwerttheorie Hermitischer Functionaloperatoren, Math.
Ann.
vol. 102 (1929) pp. 49–131.
4. M. H. Stone, Linear transformations in Hilbert space and their applications to analysis,
Amer. Math. Soc. Colloquium Publications, vol. 15, 1932.
5. J. von Neumann, Die Eindeutigkeit der Schr¨odingerschen Operatoren, Math. Ann. vol.
104 (1931) pp. 570–578.
6. P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford, Clarendon Press (1930),
§29.
M. H. Stone, Linear transformations in Hilbert space.
Operational methods and group
theory, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. vol. 16 (1930) pp. 172–175.
7. J. von Neumann, Wahrscheinlichkeitstheoretischer Aufbau der Quantenmechanik, Nachr.
Ges. Wiss. G¨ottingen (1927) pp. 245–272.
8. ———, Thermodynamik quantenmechanischer Gesamtheiten, Nachr. Ges. Wiss. G¨ottingen
(1927) pp. 273–291.
9. ———, Beweis des Ergodensatzes und des H-Theorems in der neuen Mechanik, Zeitschrift
f¨ur Physik, vol. 57 (1929) pp. 30–70.
10. ———, Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, Berlin, J. Springer (1932).
INSTITUTE FOR THEORETICAL PHYSICS OF THE UNIVERSITY,
UTRECHT, NETHERLANDS
A “von Neumann Days” Symposium took place on 3–7 May 2010
at Brown University’s Center for Computational Molcular Biology.
Remarks prepared for presentation on that occasion by Freeman
Dyson—who was a member of the Institute for Advanced Study
in 1948–1949 and became there a tenured faculty colleague of von
Neumann in 1953—were subsequently published as “A walk through
Johnny von Neumann’s garden” (Notices of the AMS 60, 155–161
(2013)), from which the following excerpt has (with permission)
been taken.
VON NEUMANN WORK RELATED TO
QUANTUM THEORY
freeman dyson
During his Berlin years, Johnny made frequent visits to G¨ottingen, where
Heisenberg had recently invented quantum mechanics and Hilbert was the
presiding mathematician. Hilbert was intensely interested in quantum mechanics
and encouraged collaboration between mathematicians and physicists. From
the point of view of Hilbert, quantum mechanics was a mess. Heisenberg had no
use for rigorous mathematics and no wish to learn it. Dirac made free use of his


Foreword
xvi
famous delta-function, which was deﬁned by a mathematical absurdity, being
inﬁnite at a single point and zero everywhere else. When Hilbert remarked to
Dirac that the delta-function could lead to mathematical contradictions, Dirac
replied, “Did I get into mathematical contradictions?” Dirac knew that his
delta-function was a good tool for calculating quantum processes, and that was
all that he needed. Twenty years later, Laurent Schwartz provided a rigorous
basis for the delta-function and proved that Dirac was right. Meanwhile, Johnny
worked with Hilbert and published a series of papers cleaning up the mess. In
1932 he published the book Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics
[9], which occupies a substantial piece of his garden.
Johnny’s book was the ﬁrst exposition of quantum mechanics that made the
theory mathematically respectable. The concepts were rigorously deﬁned and
the consequences rigorously deduced. Much of the work was original, especially
the chapters on quantum statistics and the theory of measurement. I read the
book in 1946 when I was still a pure mathematician but already intending to
switch my attention to physics. I found it enormously helpful. It gave me what
I needed, a mathematically precise statement of the theory, explaining the ﬁne
points that the physicists had been too sloppy to mention. From that book
I learned most of what I know about quantum mechanics. But then, after I
had made the transition to physics and had begun to read the current physics
journals, I was surprised to discover that nobody in the physics journals ever
referred to Johnny’s book. So far as the physicists were concerned, Johnny
did not exist. Of course, their ignorance of Johnny’s work was partly a problem
of language. The book was in German, and the ﬁrst English translation was
only published in 1955. But I think even if the book had been available in
English, the physicists of the 1940s would not have found it interesting. That
was a time when the culture of physics and the culture of mathematics were
most widely separated. The culture of physics was dominated by people like
Oppenheimer who made friends with poets and art historians but not with pure
mathematicians. The culture of mathematics was dominated by the Borbaki
cabal, which tried to expunge from mathematics everything that was not purely
abstract. The gap between physics and mathematics was as wide as the gap
between science and the humanities described by C. P. Snow in his famous
lecture on the two cultures. Johnny was one of the very few people who were
at home in all four cultures: in physics and mathematics, but also in science
and the humanities.
The central concept in Johnny’s version of quantum mechanics is the
abstract Hilbert space. Hilbert space is the inﬁnite-dimensional space in which
quantum states are vectors and observable quantities are linear operators.
Hilbert had deﬁned and explored Hilbert space long before quantum mechanics
made it useful. The unexpected usefulness of Hilbert space arises from the fact
that the equations of quantum mechanics are exactly linear. The operators form
a linear algebra, and the states can be arranged in multiplets deﬁned by linear
representations of the algebra. Johnny liked to formulate physical problems in
abstract and general language, so he formulated quantum mechanics as a theory


Foreword
xvii
of rings of linear operators in Hilbert space. A ring means a set of operators
that can be added or subtracted or multiplied together but not divided. Any
physical system obeying the rules of quantum mechanics can be described by
a ring of operators. Johnny began studying rings of operators to ﬁnd out how
many diﬀerent types of quantum systems could exist.
After Johnny published his quantum mechanics book, he continued for
several years to develop the theory of rings of operators. The third volume
of his collected works consists entirely of papers on rings of operators.
He
published seven long papers with a total of more than ﬁve hundred pages. I will
not discuss these monumental papers this morning.
They contain Johnny’s
deepest work as a pure mathematician. He proved that every ring of operators
is a direct product of irreducible rings that he called factors. He discovered that
there are ﬁve types of factor, of which only two were previously known. Each of
the types has unique and unexpected properties. Exploring the ocean of rings
of operators, he found new continents that he had no time to survey in detail.
He left the study of the three new types of factor unﬁnished.
He intended
one day to publish a grand synthesis of his work on rings of operators. The
grand synthesis remains an unwritten masterpiece, like the eighth symphony of
Sibelius.
The quantum mechanics book is the last item on my list of ﬂowers that
Johnny published in German. It was published in 1932 when he was dividing his
time equally between Berlin and Princeton. In the same year he began writing
papers in English. One of his ﬁrst papers to appear in English was “Proof of
the quasi-ergodic hypothesis” [10], which he published in the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences to make sure that American mathematicians
would read it. This paper solved an important problem in classical mechanics
using the same concept of Hilbert space that he had used to solve problems in
quantum mechanics. A classical dynamical system is said to be ergodic if after
we put it into an initial state and then leave it alone for an inﬁnite time, it
comes arbitrarily close to any ﬁnal state with probability independent of the
initial state.
Johnny proved that under certain clearly speciﬁed conditions,
a system is ergodic if and only if there exist no constants of the motion. A
constant of the motion means a quantity depending on the state of the system
which does not change as the system moves forward in time. Johnny’s theorem
provides a ﬁrm mathematical basis for the assumptions that are customarily
made by physicists using classical statistical mechanics. Translated into the
sloppy language used by physicists, the theorem says that the time-average of
any single trajectory of the system over a long time is equal to the statistical
average of all trajectories. Even more sloppily, physicists say that time-averages
are equal to ensemble averages, and we use the word ensemble to mean the set
of all states of the system.
One of the American mathematicians who read Johnny’s paper in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences was Garrett Birkhoﬀ. Garrett
was the son of George Birkhoﬀ, and both father and son were famous
mathematicians. Garrett and Johnny became close friends, and Garrett came


Foreword
xviii
to Princeton for frequent visits. After Johnny died, Garrett wrote a memoir
about the work that Johnny did in the 1930s. Here is a sentence from Garrett’s
memoir:
“Anyone wishing to get an unforgettable impression of the razor
edge of von Neumann’s mind need merely try to pursue this chain of exact
reasoning for himself, realizing that often ﬁve pages of it were written down
before breakfast, seated at a living room writing-table in a bathrobe.”
references
9. J. von Neumann,
Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, Springer, Berlin,
1932.
10. ———, “Proof of the quasi-ergodic hypothesis,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 18, 70-82 (1932).
INSTITUTE FOR ADVANCED STUDIES, PRINCETON


MATHEMATICAL FOUNDATIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS




INTRODUCTION
The object of this book is to present the new quantum mechanics in a uniﬁed
representation which, so far as it is possible and useful, is mathematically
rigorous.
This new quantum mechanics has in recent years achieved in
its essential parts what is presumably a deﬁnitive form:
the so-called
“transformation theory.” Therefore the principal emphasis shall be placed on
the general and fundamental questions which have arisen in connection with
this theory.
In particular, the diﬃcult problems of interpretation, many of
which are even now not fully resolved, will be investigated in detail. In this
connection, the relation of quantum mechanics to statistics and to the classical
statistical mechanics is of special importance. However, we shall as a rule omit
any discussion of the application of quantum mechanical methods to particular
problems, as well as any discussion of special theories derived from the general
theory—at least so far as this is possible without endangering the understanding
of general relationships. This seems the more advisable since several excellent
treatments of these problems are either in print or in process of publication.1
On the other hand, a presentation of the mathematical tools necessary
for the purposes of this theory will be given, i.e., a theory of Hilbert space
and the so-called Hermitian operators. For this end, an accurate introduction
to unbounded operators is also necessary, i.e., an extension of the theory
beyond its classical limits (developed by D. Hilbert and E. Hellinger, F. Riesz,
E. Schmidt, O. Toeplitz). The following may be said regarding the method
employed in this mode of treatment: as a rule, calculations should be performed
with the operators themselves (which represent physical quantities) and not
with the matrices, which, after the introduction of a (special and arbitrary)
coordinate system in Hilbert space, result from them. This “coordinate free,”
i.e., invariant, method, with its strongly geometrical language, possesses
noticeable formal advantages.
1 There are,
among others,
the following comprehensive treatments:
Sommerfeld, Supplement to the 4th edition of Atombau und Spectrallinien,
Braunschweig, 1928; Weyl, The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics
(translated by H. P. Robertson), London, 1931; Frenkel, Wave Mechanics,
Oxford, 1932; Born and Jordan, Elementare Quantenmechanik, Berlin, 1930;
Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Oxford, 1936.


Introduction
Dirac, in several papers, as well as in his recently published book,2 has
given a representation of quantum mechanics which is scarcely to be surpassed
in brevity and elegance, and which is at the same time of invariant character. It
is therefore perhaps ﬁtting to advance a few arguments on behalf of our method,
which deviates considerably from that of Dirac.
The method of Dirac, mentioned above (and this is overlooked today in
a great part of the quantum mechanical literature, because of the clarity and
elegance of the theory) in no way satisﬁes the requirements of mathematical
rigor—not even if these are reduced in a natural and proper fashion to the extent
common elsewhere in theoretical physics. For example, the method adheres to
the ﬁction that every self-adjoint operator can be put in diagonal form. In the
case of those operators for which this is not actually the case, this requires the
introduction of “improper” functions with self-contradictory properties. The
insertion of such a mathematical “ﬁction” is frequently necessary in Dirac’s
approach, even though the problem at hand is merely one of calculating
numerically the result of a clearly deﬁned experiment.
There would be no
objection here if these concepts, which cannot be incorporated into the present-
day framework of analysis, were intrinsically necessary for the physical theory.
Thus, as Newtonian mechanics ﬁrst brought about the development of the
inﬁnitesimal calculus, which, in its original form, was undoubtedly not self-
consistent, so quantum mechanics might suggest a new structure for our
“analysis of inﬁnitely many variables”—i.e., the mathematical technique would
have to be changed, and not the physical theory. But this is by no means the
case.
It should rather be pointed out that the quantum mechanical
“Transformation theory” can be established in a manner which is just as clear
and uniﬁed, but which is also without mathematical objections.
It should
be emphasized that the correct structure need not consist in a mathematical
reﬁnement and explanation of the Dirac method, but rather that it requires a
procedure diﬀering from the very beginning, namely, the reliance on the Hilbert
theory of operators.
In the analysis of fundamental questions, it will be shown how the statistical
formulas of quantum mechanics can be derived from a few qualitative, basic
assumptions. Furthermore, there will be a detailed discussion of the problem as
to whether it is possible to trace the statistical character of quantum mechanics
to an ambiguity (i.e., incompleteness) in our description of nature. Indeed, such
an interpretation would be a natural concomitant of the general principle that
every probability statement arises from the incompleteness of our knowledge.
This explanation “by hidden parameters,” as well as another, related to it,
which ascribes the “hidden parameter” to the observer and not to the observed
system, has been proposed more than once. However, it will appear that this
can scarcely succeed in a satisfactory way, or more precisely, such an explanation
2 See Proc. Roy. Soc. London, 109 (1925) and subsequent issues, especially
113 (1926).
Independently of Dirac, P. Jordan, (Z. Physik 40 (1926)) and
F. London (Z. Physik 40 (1926)) gave similar foundations for the theory.


Introduction
is incompatible with certain qualitative fundamental postulates of quantum
mechanics.3
The relation of quantum statistics to thermodynamics is also considered. A
closer investigation shows that the well-known diﬃculties of classical mechanics,
which are related to the “disorder” assumptions necessary for the foundations
of thermodynamics, can be eliminated here.4
3 See IV and VI.3
4 See V.




CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY CONSIDERATIONS
1. THE ORIGIN OF THE TRANSFORMATION THEORY
This is not the place to point out the great success which the quantum theory
attained in the period from 1900 to 1925, a development which was dominated
by the names of Planck, Einstein and Bohr.5
At the end of this period of
development, it was clear beyond doubt that all elementary processes, i.e., all
occurrences of an atomic or molecular order of magnitude,
obey the
“discontinuous”laws of quanta. There were also available quantitative, quantum
theoretical methods in almost all directions, which for the most part yielded
results in good or at least fair agreement with experiment.
And, what was
fundamentally of greater signiﬁcance, was that the general opinion in theoretical
physics had accepted the idea that the principle of continuity (“natura non
facit saltus”), prevailing in the macroscopic world, is merely simulated by an
averaging process in a world which in truth is discontinuous by its very nature.
This simulation is such that a man generally perceives the sum of many billions
of elementary processes simultaneously, so that the leveling law of large numbers
completely obscures the real nature of the individual processes.
Nevertheless, up to the time mentioned there existed no mathematical-
physical system of quantum theory which would have embodied everything
known up to that time in a uniﬁed structure, let alone one which could have
5 Its chief stages were: The discovery of the quantum laws by Planck for the
case of black body radiation (see Planck’s presentation in his book, Theory of
Heat Radiation (translated by M. Masius), Philadelphia, 1914); the hypothesis
of the corpuscular nature of light (theory of light quanta) by Einstein (Ann.
Phys. 17 (1905)), wherein the ﬁrst example was given of the dual form: wave-
corpuscle, which, we know today, dominates all of microscopic physics; the
application of these two sets of rules to the atomic model by Bohr (Phil. Mag.
26 (1913); Z. Physik 6 (1920)).


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
exhibited the monumental solidity of the system of mechanics, electrodynamics
and relativity theory (which system was disrupted by the quantum phenomena).
In spite of the claim of quantum theory to universality, which had evidently been
vindicated, there was lacking the necessary formal and conceptual instrument;
there was a conglomeration of essentially diﬀerent, independent, heterogeneous
and partially contradictory fragments. The most striking points in this respect
were: the correspondence principle, belonging half to classical mechanics and
electrodynamics (but which played a decisive role in the ﬁnal clariﬁcation of
the problem); the self-contradictory dual nature of light (wave and corpuscular,
cf. Note 5 and Note 148); and ﬁnally, the existence of unquantized (aperiodic)
and quantized (periodic or multiply periodic) motions.6
The year 1925 brought the resolution. A procedure initiated by Heisenberg
was developed by Born, Heisenberg, Jordan, and a little later by Dirac, into a
new system of quantum theory, the ﬁrst complete system of quantum theory
which physics has possessed. A little later Schr¨odinger developed the “wave
mechanics” from an entirely diﬀerent starting point. This accomplished the
same ends, and soon proved to be equivalent to the Heisenberg, Born, Jordan
and Dirac system (at least in a mathematical sense, cf. 3 & 4 below).7 On the
basis of the Born statistical interpretation of the quantum theoretical
description8 of nature, it was possible for Dirac and Jordan9 to join the two
theories into one, the “transformation theory,” in which they make possible a
grasp of physical problems which is especially simple mathematically.
It should be mentioned (although it does not belong to our particular
subject) that after Goudsmit and Uhlenbeck had discovered the magnetic
moment and the spin of the electron, almost all the diﬃculties of the earlier
quantum theory disappeared, so that today we are in possession of a mechanical
system which is almost entirely satisfactory. To be sure, the great unity with
electrodynamics and relativity theory mentioned earlier has not yet been
recovered, but at least there is a mechanics which is universally valid, where
the quantum laws ﬁt in a natural and necessary manner, and which explains
6 The quantum laws (added to the laws of mechanics) for multiply periodic
motions were ﬁrst developed by Epstein-Sommerfeld [see,
for example,
Sommerfeld, Atombau und Spectrallinien, Braunscheig (1924)]. On the other
hand, it was ascertained that a freely moving mass point of a planet on an
hyperbolic orbit (in contrast to those on elliptical orbits) is “unquantized.”
The reader will ﬁnd a complete treatment of this phase of quantum theory in
the books by Reiche, The Quantum Theory (translated by H. S. Hatﬁeld &
H. L. Brose), New York, 1922; and Land´e, Fortschritte der Quantentheorie,
Dresden, 1922.
7 This was proved by Schr¨odinger, Ann Physik 79 (1926).
8 Z. Physik 37 (1926).
9 See the articles mentioned in Note 2.
Schr¨odinger’s papers have been
published in book form, Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics (translated by
J. F. Shearer & W. M. Deans), London, 1928.


1. Origin of the Transformation Theory
satisfactorily the majority of our experiments.10
2. THE ORIGINAL FORMULATIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
In order to obtain a preliminary view of the problem, let us set forth brieﬂy
the basic structure of the Heisenberg-Born-Jordan “matrix mechanics” and the
Schr¨odinger “wave mechanics.”
In both theories, a classical mechanical problem is initially proposed, which
is characterized by a Hamiltonian function H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk).
(This
means the following,as may be found in greater detail in textbooks of mechanics:
Let the system have k degrees of freedom, i.e., let its existing state be
determined by giving that numerical values of k coordinates q1, . . . , qk. The
energy is a given function of the coordinates and their time derivatives:
E = L(q1, . . . , qk, ˙q1, . . . , ˙qk)
and, as a rule, is a quadratic function of the derivatives ˙q1, . . . , ˙qk.
The
“conjugate momenta” p1, . . . , pk of the coordinates q1, . . . , qk are introduced
by the relations
p1 = ∂L
∂˙q1
, . . . , pk = ∂L
∂˙qk
In the case of the above assumption on L, these depend linearly on the q1, . . . , qk.
If need be, we can eliminate the ˙q1, . . . , ˙qk from L by use of the p1, . . . , pk, so
that
E = L(q1, . . . , qk, ˙q1, . . . , ˙qk) = H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk)
(This H is the Hamiltonian function.) In both theories, we must now learn as
much as possible from this Hamiltonian function about the true, i.e., quantum
mechanical, behavior of the system. Primarily, therefore, we must determine11
10 The present state of aﬀairs may be described this way, that the theory,
so far as it deals with individual electrons or with electronic shells of atoms or
molecules, is entirely successful, as it is also whenever it deals with electrostatic
forces and with electromagnetic processes connected with the production,
transmission and transformation of light. On the other hand, in problems of the
atomic nucleus, and in all attempts to develop a general and relativistic theory
of electromagnetism, in spite of noteworthy partial successes, the theory seems
to lead to great diﬃculties, which apparently cannot be overcome without the
introduction of wholly new ideas.
11 Motion, according to classical mechanics, is determined (as is well known)
by the Hamiltonian function, since it gives rise to the equations of motion
˙qi = ∂H
∂pi
,
˙pi = −∂H
∂qi
:
i = 1, 2, . . . , k
Before the discovery of quantum mechanics, the attempt was made to explain
the quantum phenomena, while retaining these equations of motion, by the


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
the possible energy levels, then ﬁnd out the corresponding “stationary states,”
and calculate the “transition probabilities,” etc.12
The directions which the matrix theory gives for the solution of this
problem run as follows:We seek a system of 2k matrices Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk,13
which in the ﬁrst place satisfy the relations
QmQn −QnQm = O
Pm Pn −Pn Pm = O
PmQn −Qn Pm = δmn h
2πiI





(m, n = 1, 2, . . . , k)
and for which, in the second place, the matrix
W = H(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk)
becomes a diagonal matrix. (We shall not go into the details here of the origin
of these equations, especially the ﬁrst group, the so-called “commutation rules”
which govern the whole non-commutative matrix calculus of this theory. The
reader will ﬁnd exhaustive treatments of this subject in the works cited inNote 1.
The quantity h [= 2πℏ] is Planck’s constant. The diagonal elements of W, say
formulation of supplementary quantum conditions (see Note 6).
For each
set of values of q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk, given at time t = 0, the equations of
motion determined the further time variation, or “orbit,” of the system in the
2k dimensional “phase space” q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk. Any additional condition,
therefore, results in a limitation of all possible initial values or orbits to a
certain discrete set. (Then, corresponding to the few admissible orbits, there
is only a smaller number of possible energy levels.)
Even though quantum
mechanics has broken completely with this method, it is nevertheless clear
from the outset that the Hamiltonian function must still play a great role in
it. Indeed, common experience proves the validity of the Bohr correspondence
principle, which asserts that the quantum theory must give results in agreement
with those of classical mechanics in the so-called limiting case of large quantum
numbers.
12 The three latter concepts are taken from the old quantum theory developed
principally by N. Bohr. Later we shall analyze these ideas in detail from the
point of view of quantum mechanics. See the Dirac theory of radiation given
in III.6. Their historical development can be followed in Bohr’s papers on the
structure of the atom, published from 1913 to 1916.
13 As a more detailed analysis would show, this is a problem of inﬁnite
matrices. We shall not go farther here into the properties of such matrices,
since we shall consider them thoroughly later on. For the moment it suﬃces
that the formal algebraic calculation with these matrices is to be understood in
the sense of the known rules of matrix addition and multiplication. By O and
I we mean the null matrix and the unit matrix respectively (with all elements
identically zero, and with elements equal to 1 on the main diagonal and zero
everywhere else, respectively).


2. The Original Formulations of Quantum Mechanics
w1, w2, . . . are then the diﬀerent allowed energy levels of the system.
The
elements of the matrices Q1, . . . , Qk—q(1)
mn, . . . , q(k)
mn—determine in a certain way
the transition probabilities of the system (from the mth state with energy wm
to the nth state with energy wn, wm > wn) and the radiation thereby emitted.
In addition, it should be noted that the matrix
W = H(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk)
is not completely determined by the Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk and the classical
Hamiltonian function
H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk)
inasmuch as the Qi and Pi do not all commute with one another (in
multiplication), while it would be meaningless to distinguish between say p1q1
and q1p1 for H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk) in the classical mechanical sense.
We
must therefore determine the order of the variables qi and pi in the terms of
H, beyond the classical meaning of this expression. This process has not been
carried out with complete generality, but the appropriate arrangements are
known for the most important special cases. (In the simplest case, whenever
the system under investigation consists of particles, and therefore has k = 3ν
coordinates q1, . . . , q3ν—such that, e.g., q3µ−2, q3µ−1, q3µ are the three cartesian
coordinates of the µth particle, µ = 1, . . . , ν—in which the interaction of these
particles is given by a potential energy V (q1, . . . , q3ν), there is no such doubt.
The classical Hamiltonian is then
H(q1, . . . , q3ν, p1, . . . , p3ν) =
ν
%
µ=1
2mµ
(p2
3µ−2 + p2
3µ−1 + p2
3µ)
+ V (q1, . . . , q3ν)
where mµ is the mass of the µth particle, and p3µ−2, p3µ−1, p3µ are the
components of its momentum. What this means after the substitution of the
matrices
Q1, . . . , Q3ν, P1, . . . , P3ν
is perfectly clear; in particular, the potential energy introduces no diﬃculties,
since all the Q1, . . . , Q3ν commute with each other.) It is important that only
Hermitian matrices be permitted, i.e., such matrices A = {amn}, for which
amn = anm holds identically (the elements amn may be complex!). Therefore
H(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk)
must be Hermitian, whenever all the Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk are such.
This
involves a certain restriction in the problem of the order of the factors which
was mentioned above. However, the restriction is not suﬃcient to determine the


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
H(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk) uniquely from the classical H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk).14
On the other hand, the directions of wave mechanics are the following:
First we form the Hamiltonian H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk) and then the diﬀerential
equation
H(q1, . . . , qk, ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk )ψ(q1, . . . , qk) = λψ(q1, . . . , qk)
for an arbitrary function ψ(q1, . . . , qk) in the conﬁguration space of the system
(and not the phase space, i.e., the p1, . . . , pk do not enter into ψ). In this way,
H(q1, . . . , qk, ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk )
is interpreted simply as a functional operator. For example, this operator in
the case mentioned above,
H(q1, . . . , q3ν, p1, . . . , p3ν) =
ν
%
µ=1
2mµ
(p2
3µ−2 + p2
3µ−1 + p2
3µ)
+ V (q1, . . . , q3ν)
transforms the function ψ(q1, . . . , qk) into
ν
%
µ=1
2mµ
&ℏ
i
'2& ∂2
∂q2
3µ−2
ψ + ∂2
∂q2
3µ−1
ψ + ∂2
∂q2
3µ
ψ
'
+ V ψ
(we have omitted the variables q1, . . . , q3ν). Since the operation
q1 ℏ
i
∂
∂q1
is diﬀerent from the operation15
ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 q1
14 If Q1, P1 are Hermitian, neither Q1P1 nor P1Q1 is necessarily Hermitian,
but it is true that 1
2(Q1P1 + P1Q1) is always Hermitian. In the case of Q2
1 P1,
we should also consider 1
2(Q2
1 P1 + P1Q2
1) as well as Q1P1Q1 (however, these
two expressions happen to be equal for P1Q1 −Q1P1 = (ℏ/i)I). In the case
Q2
1 P2
1, we should also consider 1
2(Q2
1 P2
1 + P2
1 Q2
1), Q1P2
1 Q1, P1Q2
1 P1, etc. (these
expressions do not all coincide in the special case mentioned above). We shall
not discuss this further at present, since the operator calculus developed later
will permit these relations to be seen much more clearly.
15 We have
ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 (q1ψ) = q1 ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 ψ + ℏ
i ψ
Consequently
ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 · q1 −q1 · ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 = ℏ
i I
where I is the identity operator (transforming ψ into itself), i.e., ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 and q1
satisfy the same commutation rules as the matrices P1 and Q1.


2. The Original Formulations of Quantum Mechanics
there is here, too, an uncertainty because of the ambiguity of the order of the
terms qi and pi in
H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk)
However, Schr¨odinger has pointed out how this uncertainty can be eliminated,
by reduction to a deﬁnite variational principle, in such a way that the resulting
diﬀerential equation becomes self-adjoint.16
Now this diﬀerential equation (the “wave equation”) has the character of an
eigenvalue problem in which λ is to be interpreted as an eigenvalue parameter,
and in which the vanishing of the eigenfunction ψ = ψ(q1, . . . , qk) at the
boundaries of the conﬁguration space (the space of the q1, . . . , qk)—together
with the conditions of regularity and single-valuedness—is required.
In the
sense of the wave theory, the eigenvalues of λ (both discrete and continuous
spectra)17 are the allowed energy levels. And even the corresponding (complex)
eigenfunctions are related to the corresponding (stationary, in the Bohr sense)
states of the system. For a ν-electron system (k = 3ν, see above; e is the charge
of the electron) the charge density of the µth electron, measured at the point
x, y, x, is given by the expression
e
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
(3ν−3)fold
|ψ(q1 . . . q3µ−3xyzq3µ+1 . . . q3ν)|2dq1 · · · dq3µ−3dq3µ+1 · · · dq3ν
i.e., according to Schr¨odinger, this electron is to be thought of as “smeared”
over the entire x, y, z (= q3µ−2, q3µ−1, q3µ) space. (In order that the total charge
be e, ψ must be normalized by the condition
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
(3ν)fold
|ψ(q1, . . . , q3ν)|2dq1 · · · dq3ν = 1
The integration is over all 3ν variables. The same equation obtains for each
µ = 1, . . . , ν.)
In addition, the wave mechanics can also make observations on systems
which are not in Bohr stationary states,18 in the following way: If the state is
not stationary, i.e., if it changes with time, then the wave function
ψ(q1, . . . , qk; t)
16 See his ﬁrst two articles, in the book mentioned in Note 9 (also Ann. Phys.
79 (1926)).
17 See the ﬁrst of the works of Schr¨odinger mentioned in Note 16. A precise
deﬁnition of the spectrum and its parts will be given later, in II.6 to II.9.
18 In the original framework of matrix mechanics (see our presentation above),
such a general state concept, of which the stationary states are special cases,
was not given. Only the stationary states, arranged according to the values of
the energy, were the object of that theory.


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
contains time t, and it varies according to the diﬀerential equation19
−H(q1, . . . , qk, ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk )ψ(q1, . . . , qk; t) = ℏ
i
∂
∂tψ(q1, . . . , qk; t)
That is, ψ can be given arbitrarily for t = t0, and it is then determined uniquely
for all t. Even the stationary ψ are really time-dependent, as a comparison of
the two Schr¨odinger diﬀerential equations will show, but the dependence on t
is given by
ψ(q1, . . . , qk; t) = e−iλt/ℏ· ψ(q1, . . . , qk)
That is, t appears only in a factor of absolute value independent of q1, . . . , qk
(i.e., constant in conﬁguration space), so that, for example, the charge density
distribution deﬁned above does not change. (We shall suppose generally—and
we shall ﬁnd this conﬁrmed later by more detailed considerations—that a factor
of absolute value 1 and constant in conﬁguration space is, in the case of ψ,
essentially unobservable.)
Since the eigenfunctions of the ﬁrst diﬀerential equation form a complete
orthogonal set,20 we can develop each ψ(q1, . . . , qk) in terms of this set of
functions. If ψ1, ψ2, . . . are the eigenfunctions (all independent of time), and
λ1, λ2, . . . are their respective eigenvalues, the development becomes21
ψ(q1, . . . , qk) =
∞
%
n=1
anψn(q1, . . . , qk)
If ψ is still time-dependent, then t is introduced in the coeﬃcients an (the
eigenfunctions ψ1, ψ2, . . . on the other hand are to be understood both here and
in everything which follows as independent of time). Therefore, if the
ψ = ψ(q1, . . . , qk)
at hand is actually ψ = ψ(q1, . . . , qk; t0), then it follows with regard to
ψ = ψ(q1, . . . , qk; t) =
∞
%
n=1
an(t)ψn
that
Hψ =
∞
%
n=1
an(t)Hψn =
∞
%
n=1
λnan(t)ψn
ℏ
i
∂
∂tψ =
∞
%
n=1
ℏ
i ˙an(t)ψn
19 H = H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk) may also contain the time t explicitly.
Naturally, there will then be in general no stationary states at all.
20 Provided that only a discrete spectrum exists. See II.6.
21 These, as also all the following series expansions, converge “in the mean.”
We shall consider this again in II.2.


3. The Transformation Theory
and by equating the coeﬃcients of the second diﬀerential equation:
ℏ
i ˙an(t) = −λnan(t)
=⇒
an(t) = cne−iλnt/ℏ
i.e.,
an(t) = e−iλn(t−t0)/ℏan
ψ = ψ(q1, . . . , qk; t) =
∞
%
n=1
e−iλn(t−t0)/ℏanψn(q1, . . . , qk)
Therefore, if ψ is not stationary, i.e., if all an except one do not vanish, then
ψ (for variable t) no longer changes only by a space constant factor of absolute
value unity. Therefore, in general, the charge densities also change, i.e., real
electrical oscillations occur in space.22
We see that the initial concepts and the practical methods of the two
theories diﬀer considerably. Nevertheless, from the beginning they have always
yielded the same results, even where both gave details diﬀering from the older
concept of quantum theory.23 This extraordinary situation was soon clariﬁed,24
as mentioned in I.1, with the proof by Schr¨odinger of their mathematical
equivalence.
We shall turn our attention to this equivalence proof, and at
the same time explain the Dirac-Jordan general transformation theory (which
combines the two theories).
3. THE EQUIVALENCE OF THE TWO THEORIES:
The Transformation Theory
The fundamental problem of the matrix theory was to ﬁnd the matrices
Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk such that ﬁrst, the commutation rules of I.2 (page 4) are
satisﬁed, and second, that a certain function of these matrices,
H(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk)
becomes a diagonal matrix. This problem had already been been divided into
two parts by Born and Jordan in their ﬁrst publication:
First, matrices ¯Q1, . . . , ¯Qk, ¯P1, . . . , ¯Pk were sought which have only to
satisfy the commutation rules. This could easily be accomplished;25 then, in
general
¯H = H(¯Q1, . . . , ¯Qk, ¯P1, . . . , ¯Pk)
22 That such oscillations fail to occur for the stationary states, and only for
those, was one of the most important postulates of Bohr in 1913. Classical
electrodynamics is in direct contradiction to this.
23 See the second work of Schr¨odinger mentioned in Note 16.
24 See Note 7.
25 See, for example, §§20 & 23 of the book of Born and Jordan mentioned in
Note 1.


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
would not be a diagonal matrix. Then the correct solutions were expressed in
the form
Q1 = S
–1 ¯Q1S
...
Qk = S
–1 ¯QkS
P1 = S
–1 ¯P1 S
...
Pk = S
–1 ¯Pk S
where S could be an arbitrary matrix (except that it must be one which possesses
an inverse S –1 with the properties S –1S = SS –1 = I). Since the validity of the
commutation rules for Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk follows (identically in S!) from
the validity of the rules for ¯Q1, . . . , ¯Qk, ¯P1, . . . , ¯Pk and since
¯H = H(¯Q1, . . . , ¯Qk, ¯P1, . . . , ¯Pk)
goes over into26
H = H(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk)
with
S
–1 ¯H S = H
the only requirement put on S is that S –1 ¯H S be a diagonal matrix where ¯H
is given. (Of course, one would also have to see to it that S –1 ¯Q1 S, etc. be
Hermitian, just as the ¯Q1, etc. were. However, it can be shown upon closer
examination that this additional condition on S can always be satisﬁed later,
and it shall therefore not be considered in these initial observations.)
Consequently there is need of transforming a given ¯H to the diagonal form
by means of the scheme S –1 ¯H S. Let us formulate therefore precisely what this
means.
Let the matrix H have the elements hµν, the desired matrix S the elements
sµν, and the (also unknown) diagonal matrix H the diagonal elements wµ, i.e.,
the general element wµδµν.27 Now H = S –1 ¯H S is the same as SH = ¯HS, and
this means (if we equate the corresponding elements to one another on both
26 Because
S
–1 · I · S = I
S
–1 · (A + B) · S = S
–1AS + S
–1BS
S
–1 · aA · S = a · S
–1AS
S
–1 · AB · S = S
–1AS · S
–1BS
therefore, for each matrix polynomial P(A, B, . . .),
S
–1P(A, B, . . .)S = P(S
–1AS, S
–1BS, . . .)
If we choose for P the left sides of the commutation relations, their invariance
follows from this; if we choose H for P, then we get S –1 ¯H S = H.
27 δµν = 1 for µ = ν and = 0 for µ ̸= ν is the well-known Kronecker delta.


3. The Transformation Theory
sides of the equation,according to the wellknown rules of matrix multiplication):
%
ν
sµν · wνδνρ =
%
ν
hµν · sνρ
i.e.,
%
ν
hµν · sνρ = wρ · sµρ
The individual columns s1ρ, s2ρ, . . . (ρ = 1, 2, . . .) of the matrix S and the
corresponding diagonal elements wρ of the matrix H are therefore solutions
of the so-called eigenvalue problem, which runs as follows:
%
ν
hµνxν = λ · xµ
(µ = 1, 2, . . .)
(The trivial solution x1 = x2 = · · · = 0 is naturally excluded.) In fact, xν = sνρ,
λ = wρ is a solution. (xν ≡0 i.e., sνρ ≡0 [for all ν] is inadmissible, because
then the ρth column of S would vanish identically, although S possesses an
inverse S –1!) It is worth mentioning that these are essentially the only solutions.
Indeed, the above equation means the following: the transform of the vector
x = (x1, x2, . . .) by the matrix ¯H is equal to its multiple by the number λ. We
transform x = (x1, x2, . . .) by S –1, and there results a vector y = (y1, y2, . . .). If
we transform y by H, then this is the same as the transform of x by
HS
–1 = S
–1 ¯HSS
–1 = S
–1 ¯H
Hence it is a transform of λx by S –1, and therefore the result is λy. Now Hy
has the components
%
ν
wµδµνyν = wµyµ
and λy the components λyµ. Therefore it is required that wµyµ = λyµ for all
µ = 1, 2, . . . ; i.e., yµ = 0 whenever wµ ̸= λ. If we call ηρ that vector whose
ρth component is 1, but all others of which are 0, then this means: y is a linear
combination of those ηρ for which wρ = λ—in particular it is zero if there are
none such. The value of x results from the application of S to y, therefore it
is a linear combination of the ηρ from before, transformed with S. The µth
component of Sηρ is (since the νth component of ηρ was δνρ)
%
ν
sµνδνρ = sµρ
If we then interpret the ρth column (s1ρ, s2ρ, . . .) of S as a vector, then x is a
linear combination of all columns for which wρ = λ—and in particular is zero
if this does not occur. Consequentially, our original assertion has been proved:
the w1, w2, . . . are the only eigenvalues and the xν = sνρ, λ = wρ are essentially
the only solutions.


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
This is very important, because not only does the knowledge of S, H
determine all the solutions of the eigenvalue problem, but conversely, we can also
determine S, H as soon as we have solved the eigenvalue problem completely. For
example, for H: The wµ are plainly all solutions λ, and each such λ appears
in the series w1, w2, . . . as often as there are linearly independent solutions
x1, x2, . . .28—hence the w1, w2, . . . are already determined except for their
order.29
The fundamental problem of the matrix theory is then the solution of the
eigenvalue equation
E1
%
ν
hµνxν = λ · xµ
(µ = 1, 2, . . .)
Let us now go on to the wave theory. The fundamental equation of this
theory is the “wave equation”
E2
Hφ(q1, . . . , qk) = λφ(q1, . . . , qk)
in which H is the diﬀerential operator already discussed—we seek all solutions
φ(q1, . . . , qk) and λ,
with the exclusion of the trivial φ(q1, . . . , qk) ≡0,
λ arbitrary. This is analogous to what was required of E1: the sequence x1, x2, . . .,
which we can also regard as a function xν of the “discontinuous” variable ν (with
the variable values 1, 2, . . .) corresponds to the function φ(q1, . . . , qk) with the
“continuous” variables q1, . . . , qk; λ has the same role each time. However, the
linear transformation
xµ −→
%
ν
hµνxν
shows little similarity to the other
φ(q1, . . . , qk) −→Hφ(q1, . . . , qk)
How should such an analogy be obtained here?
We have regarded the index ν as a variable, and placed it in correspondence
with the k variables q1, . . . , qk ; i.e., a positive integer with the general point of
the k-dimensional conﬁguration space (which may be called Ωfrom now on).
Therefore we should not expect that -
ν can be carried over as a sum into Ω.
We should rather expect the integral
.
Ω· · ·
.
Ω· · · dq1 · · · dqk (or more brieﬂy,
.
Ω· · · dv, where dv is the volume element dq1 · · · dqk in Ω) to be the correct
analog. To the matrix element hµν which depends upon two variables of the
28 The S columns s1ρ, s2ρ, . . . of the ρ with wρ = λ form a complete set of
solutions, and as columns of a matrix which possesses an inverse, they must be
linearly independent.
29 Since an arbitrary permutation of the columns of S, together with the
corresponding permutation of the rows of S –1, permutes the diagonal elements
of H in the same way, the order of the w1, w2, . . . is in fact indeterminate.


3. The Transformation Theory
type of the index ν there corresponds a function
h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′)
in which the q1, . . . , qk and the q1
′, . . . , qk
′ run through the whole Ωdomain
independently. The transformation
xµ −→
%
ν
hµνxν
or
xν −→
%
ν′
hνν′xν′
then becomes
φ(q1, . . . , qk) −→
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′)
φ(q1
′, . . . , qk
′)dq1
′ · · · dqk
′
and the eigenvalue problem E1, which we can also write as
E1
%
ν′
hνν′xν′ = λ · xν
becomes
E3
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′)
φ(q1
′, . . . , qk
′)dq1
′ · · · dqk
′ = λ · φ(q1, . . . , qk)
Eigenvalue problems of the type E3 have been investigated extensively in
mathematics, and can in fact be handled in far reaching analogy to the problem
E1. They are known as “integral equations.”30
But, unfortunately, E2 does not have this form, or, rather, it can only be
brought to this form if a function h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′) can be found for the
diﬀerential operator
H = H(q1, . . . , qk, ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk )
such that
I
Hφ(q1, . . . , qk) =
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′)
φ(q1
′, . . . , qk
′)dq1
′ · · · dqk
′
identically, i.e., for all φ(q1, . . . , qk). This h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′), if it exists,
is called the “kernel” of the functional operator H, and H itself is then called
an “integral operator.”
30 The theory of integral equations has received its deﬁnitive form through
the work of Fredholm and Hilbert. An exhaustive treatment, complete with
references, is found in the book by Courant and Hilbert, Methoden der
Mathematischen Physik, Berlin, 1931.


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
Nowsucha transformation is generally impossible, i.e.,diﬀerential operators
H are never integral operators. Even the simplest functional operator, which
transforms each φ into itself—this operator is called I—is not one.
Let us
convince ourselves of this, and for simplicity, take k = 1. Then let it be required
that
∆1
φ(q) =
(
∞
−∞
h(q, q ′)φ(q ′)dq ′
We replace φ(q) by φ(q + q0), set q = 0 and introduce the integration variable
q′′ = q′ + q0. Then
φ(q0) =
(
∞
−∞
h(0, q′′ −q0)φ(q′′)dq′′
If we replace q0, q′′ by q, q′ then we see that h(0, q′ −q) along with h(q, q′) solves
our problem, hence we may assume that h(q, q′) is only dependent upon q′ −q.
Then the requirement becomes
∆2
φ(q) =
(
∞
−∞
h(q′ −q)dq′
:
h(q, q′) = h(q′ −q)
Replacing again φ(q + q0) for φ(q), it suﬃces to consider q = 0, i.e.,
∆3
φ(0) =
(
∞
−∞
h(q)φ(q)dq
Replacing φ(q) by φ(−q) shows that h(−q) is also a solution along with h(q),
therefore
h1(q) = 1
/
h(q) + h(−q)
is also, so that h(q) may be considered to be an even function of q.
It is clear that these conditions are impossible of fulﬁllment: If we choose
φ(q) = h(q) for q ≷0, φ(0) = 0, then it follows from ∆3 that h(q) = 0 for
q ≷0.31 But if we choose φ(q) = 1, then we obtain
(
∞
−∞
h(q)dq = 1
while
(
∞
−∞
h(q)dq = 0
follows directly from the above.
31 More precisely, if we take as a basis the Lebesgue concept of integral, then
for q ≷0, h(q) = 0 except for a set of measure 0—i.e., except for such a set
h(q) = 0 identically.


3. The Transformation Theory
Dirac nevertheless assumes the existence of such a function
∆4
δ(q) = 0 for q ≷0,
δ(q) = δ(−q),
(
∞
−∞
δ(q)dq = 1
This would imply ∆3:
(
∞
−∞
δ(q)φ(q)dq = φ(0)
(
∞
−∞
δ(q)dq +
(
∞
−∞
δ(q)[φ(q) −φ(0)]dq
= φ(0) · 1 +
(
∞
−∞
0 · dq
= φ(0)
therefore also ∆1 and ∆2. We should thus think of this function as vanishing
everywhere except at the origin, and of its being so strongly inﬁnite there that
the integral still comes out to be 1 for δ(q).32
If we have once accepted this ﬁction, it is possible to represent the most
varied diﬀerential operators as integral operators—provided that, in addition
to δ(q), we also introduce its derivatives. Then we have
dn
dqn φ(q) = dn
dqn
(
∞
−∞
δ(q −q′)φ(q′)dq′ =
(
∞
−∞
∂n
∂qn δ(q −q′)φ(q′)dq′
=
(
∞
−∞
δ(n)(q −q′) · φ(q′)dq′
qnφ(q) =
(
∞
−∞
δ(q −q′)qn · φ(q′)dq′
i.e., dn
dqn and qn have the kernels δ(n)(q −q′) and δ(n)(q −q′)qn, respectively.
According to this scheme, we can investigate the kernels of rather complicated
diﬀerential operators. For several variables q1, . . . , qk the delta functions lead
to the result
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
δ(q1 −q1
′)δ(q2 −q2
′) · · · δ(qk −qk
′)φ(q1
′, q2
′ . . . , qk
′)dq1
′ · · · dqk
′
=
(
∞
−∞
· · ·
1 (
∞
−∞
1 (
∞
−∞
φ(q1
′, q2
′ . . . , qk
′)δ(q1 −q1
′)dq1
′
δ(q2 −q2
′)dq2
′
· · ·
δ(qk −qk
′)dqk
′
32 The area under the curve of δ(q) is then to be thought of as inﬁnitely thin
and inﬁnitely high, for the point situated at q = 0, and of area unity. This may
be viewed as the limiting behavior for the function
a/πe−aq2 as a →∞but
it is nevertheless impossible.


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
=
(
∞
−∞
· · ·
1 (
∞
−∞
1 (
∞
−∞
φ(q1, q2
′ . . . , qk
′)δ(q2 −q2
′)dq2
′
· · ·
δ(qk −qk
′)dqk
′
...
= φ(q1, q2, . . . , qk)
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
δ ′(q1 −q1
′)δ(q2 −q2
′) · · · δ(qk −qk
′)φ(q1
′, q2
′ . . . , qk
′)dq1
′ · · · dqk
′
= ∂
∂q1
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
δ(q1 −q1
′)δ(q2 −q2
′) · · · δ(qk −qk
′)φ(q1
′, q2
′ . . . , qk
′)dq1
′ · · · dqk
′
= ∂
∂q1
φ(q1, . . . , qk),
etc.
Hence the integral representation I can be in practice achieved for all
operators.
As soon as we have achieved this representation, the analogy of problems
E1 and E2 is complete. We have only to replace ν, ν ′, -
ν and x by
q1, . . . , qk;
q1
′, . . . , qk
′;
(
· · ·
(
)
*+
,
Ω
· · · dq1
′ · · · dqk
′
and
φ
As the vectors xν correspond to the functions φ(q1, . . . , qk), the kernels
h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′) must correspond to the matrices hνν′; however, it
is useful to regard the kernels themselves as matrices, and consequently to
interpret the q1, . . . , qk
as row- and the q1
′, . . . , qk
′
as column-indices,
corresponding to ν and ν′ respectively.
We then have, in addition to the
ordinary matrices {hνν′} with discrete row-column domains enumerated by the
numbers 1, 2, . . ., others,
{h(q1, . . . , qk; q1
′, . . . , qk
′)}
(the kernels), for which each domain is characterized by k variables, varying
continuously throughout the entire Ω.
This analogy may seem entirely formal, but in reality it is not so. The
indices ν and ν ′ can also be regarded as coordinates in a state space, that is,
if we interpret them as quantum numbers (in the sense of the Bohr theory: as
numbers of the possible orbits in phase space which are then discrete because
of the restrictions of the quantum conditions).
We do not desire to follow any further here this train of thought which was
shaped by Dirac and Jordan into a uniﬁed theory of the quantum processes.
The “improper” functions (such as δ(x), δ ′(x)) play a decisive role in this
development—they lie beyond the scope of mathematical methods generally
used, and we desire to describe quantum mechanics with the help of these
latter methods. We therefore pass over to the other (Schr¨odinger) method of
uniﬁcation of the two theories.


4. Hilbert Space
4. THE EQUIVALENCE OF THE TWO THEORIES:
Hilbert Space
The method sketched in 1.3 resulted in an analogy between the “discrete”
space of index values Z = (1, 2, . . .) and the continuous state space Ωof the
mechanical system (Ωis k-dimensional, where k is the number of classical
mechanical degrees of freedom). That this cannot be achieved without some
violence to the formalism and to mathematics is not surprising. The spaces Z
and Ωare very diﬀerent, and every attempt to relate the two must run into
great diﬃculties.33
What we do have, however, is not a relation of Z to Ω, but only a relation
between the functions in these two spaces, i.e., between the sequences x1, x2, . . .
which are the functions in Z, and the wave functions φ(q1, . . . , qk) which are
the functions in Ω. These functions, furthermore, are the entities which enter
most essentially into the problems of quantum mechanics.
In the Schr¨odinger theory, the integral
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
plays an important role—it must equal 1 in order that φ can be given a
physical interpretation (see 1.2).
In matrix theory, on the other hand (see
problem E1 in 1.3), the vector x1, x2, . . . plays the decisive role. The condition
of ﬁniteness &
ν |xν|2 in the sense of the Hilbert theory of such eigenvalue
problems (see reference in Note 30) is always imposed on this vector. It is also
customary, having excluded the trivial solution xν ≡0, to set up the normal-
ization condition &
ν |xν|2 = 1. It is plain in Z or Ωthat this limits the ﬁeld
of admissible functions to those with ﬁnite
'
ν
|xν|2
or
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
because only with such functions can the above &
ν or
(
· · ·
(
Ωbe made equal
to 1 by multiplication with a constant factor—i.e., can be normalized in the
33 Such a uniﬁcation was undertaken, long before quantum mechanics, by
E. H. Moore, the originator of the so-called “general analysis.” See the article
on this subject by Hellinger & Toeplitz in Math. Enzyklop¨adie, vol II, C, 13,
Leipzig, 1927.


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
usual sense.34 We call the totality of such functions FZ and FΩ, respectively.
Now the following theorem holds: FZ and FΩare isomorphic (Fischer
and F. Riesz35). To be precise, this means the following: It is possible to set
up a one-to-one correspondence between FZ and FΩ; i.e., to each sequence
x1, x2, . . . with ﬁnite &
ν |xν|2 a function φ(q1, . . . , qk) with ﬁnite
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
can be assigned, and conversely in such a manner that this correspondence is
linear and isometric. By “linearity” this is meant: if x1, x2, . . . corresponds to
φ(q1, . . . , qk)
and
y1, y2, . . .
to
ψ(q1, . . . , qk),
then
ax1, ax2, . . .
and
x1 + y1, x2 + y2, . . . correspond respectively aφ(q1, . . . , qk) and
φ(q1, . . . , qk) + ψ(q1, . . . , qk)
By “isometry” this is meant: if x1, x2, . . . and φ(q1, . . . , qk) correspond to one
another then
'
ν
|xν|2 =
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
(The word isometric has the connotation that it is customaryto regard x1, x2, . . .
and φ(q1, . . . , qk) as vectors, and to consider
) '
ν
|xν|2
* 1
and
) !
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
* 1
34 It is a repeatedly observed fact in the Schr¨odinger theory that only the
ﬁniteness of
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
is required in the case of the wave functions φ. So, for example, φ may be
singular, or perhaps become inﬁnite, if only the above integral remains ﬁnite.
An instructive example for this is the hydrogen atom in the relativistic theory
of Dirac; see Proc. Roy. Soc. 117 (1928); also W. Gordon, Z. Physik 48, (1928).
35 In the course of our discussion of Hilbert space, a proof of this theorem will
be given (see II.2 & II.3, especially theorem 5 in II.2). It is worth mentioning
that the part of this theorem suﬃcient for many purposes, and easier to prove,
is the isomorphism between FΩand an appropriate part of FZ; this is due to
Hilbert (G¨ott. Nachr. 1906). Thus Schr¨odinger’s original equivalence proof
(see Note 7) corresponds to just this part of the theorem.


4. Hilbert Space
as their “lengths.”)
In addition, if x1, x2, . . . and y1, y2, . . . correspond
respectively to φ(q1, . . . , qk) and ψ(q1, . . . , qk), then
'
ν
xν ¯yν =
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
φ(q1, . . . , qk)ψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqk
(and both sides are absolutely convergent). On this latter point, it should be
observed that one might have preferred to have quite generally
'
ν
xν =
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
φ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqk
or something similar; i.e., a complete analogy between addition on the one hand
and integration on the other—but a closer examination shows that addition &
ν
and integration
'
ν
xν =
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
· · · dq1 . . . dqk
are employed in quantum mechanics only in such expressions as xν ¯yν or
φ(q1, . . . , qk)ψ(q1, . . . , qk), respectively.
We do not intend to pursue any investigation at this point as to how this
correspondence is to be established, since this will be of great concern to us
in the next chapter. But we should emphasize what its existence means: Z
and Ωare very diﬀerent, and to set up a direct relation between them must
lead to great mathematical diﬃculties.
On the other hand, FZ and FΩare
isomorphic, i.e., identical in their intrinsic structure (they realize the same
abstract structure in diﬀerent forms)—and since they (and not Z and Ω!) are
the real analytical substrata of the matrix and wave theories, this isomorphism
means that the two theories must always yield the same numerical results. That
is, this is the case whenever the isomorphism lets the matrix
¯H = H(¯Q1, . . . , ¯Qk; ¯P1, . . . , ¯Pk)
and the operator
H = H(q1, . . . , qk, ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk )
correspond to one another.
Since both are obtained by the same algebraic
operations from the matrices ¯Qℓ, ¯Pℓ(ℓ= 1, . . . , k) and the functional operators
qℓ, (ℏ/i) ∂
∂qℓrespectively, it suﬃces to show that qℓcorresponds to the matrix
¯Qℓand (ℏ/i) ∂
∂qℓto the matrix ¯Pℓ. Now nothing further is required of the ¯Qℓ, ¯Pℓ
(ℓ= 1, . . . , k) than that they satisfy the commutation rules mentioned in 1.2:
QmQn −QnQm = O
Pm Pn −Pn Pm = O
PmQn −Qn Pm = δmn h
2πiI





(m, n = 1, 2, . . . , k)
But the matrices corresponding to the qℓ, (ℏ/i) ∂
∂qℓwill certainly do this, because


Chapter I: Introductory Considerations
the functional operators qℓ, (ℏ/i) ∂
∂qℓpossess the properties mentioned,36 and
these are not lost in the isomorphic transformation to FZ.
Since the systems FZ and FΩare isomorphic, and since the theories of
quantum mechanics constructed on them are mathematically equivalent, it is
to be expected that a uniﬁed theory, independent of the accidents of the formal
framework selected at the time, and exhibiting only the really essential elements
of quantum mechanics, will then be achieved if we do this: Investigate the
intrinsic properties (common to FZ and FΩ) of these systems of functions, and
choose these properties as a starting point.
The system FZ is generally known as “Hilbert space.”
Therefore, our
ﬁrst problem is to investigate the fundamental properties of Hilbert space,
independent of the special form of FZ or FΩ.
The mathematical structure
which is described by these properties (which in any speciﬁc special case are
equivalently represented by calculations within FZ or FΩ, but for general
purposes are easier to handle directly than by such calculations) is called
“abstract Hilbert space.”
We wish then to describe the abstract Hilbert space, and then to prove
rigorously the following points:
1.
That the abstract Hilbert space is characterized uniquely by the
properties speciﬁed, i.e., that it admits of no essentially diﬀerent realizations.
2. That its properties belong to FZ as well as FΩ. (In this respect the
properties discussed only qualitatively in 1.4 will be analyzed rigorously.) When
this has been accomplished, we will employ the mathematical equipment thus
obtained to shape the structure of quantum mechanics.
36 We have
qm · qn · φ(q1, . . . , qk) = qn · qm · φ(q1, . . . , qk)
∂
∂qm
∂
∂qn
φ(q1, . . . , qk) = ∂
∂qn
∂
∂qm
φ(q1, . . . , qk)
∂
∂qm
qn · φ(q1, . . . , qk) −qn ∂
∂qm
· φ(q1, . . . , qk) = δmnφ(q1, . . . , qk)


CHAPTER II
ABSTRACT HILBERT SPACE
1. THE DEFINITION OF HILBERT SPACE
We must now carry out the program outlined at the end of I.4: to deﬁne
Hilbert space, which furnishes the mathematical basis for the treatment of
quantum mechanics in terms of those concepts which are subsequently needed
in quantum mechanics, and which have accordingly the same meaning in the
“discrete” function space FZ of the sequences xν (ν = 1, 2, . . .) and in the
“continuous” FΩof the wave functions φ(q1, . . . , qk) (q1, . . . , qk run through the
entire state space Ω). These concepts are the following ones, as we have already
indicated:
α) The “scalar product,” i.e., the product of a (complex) number a with
an element f of Hilbert space: af. In FZ, axν is obtained from xν, while in
FΩ, aφ(q1, . . . , qk) is obtained from φ(q1, . . . , qk).
β ) The addition and subtraction of two elements f, g of Hilbert space: f±g.
In FZ, xν ±yν results from xν and yν; in FΩ, φ(q1, . . . , qk)±ψ(q1, . . . , qk) results
from φ(q1, . . . , qk) and ψ(q1, . . . , qk).
γ) The “inner product” of two elements f, g in Hilbert space. Unlike α and
β, this operation produces a complex number, and not an element of Hilbert
space: (f, g). In FX, !
ν xν ¯yν is obtained from xν and yν, while in FΩ,
"
· · ·
"
#
$%
&
Ω
φ(q1, . . . , qk)ψ(q1, . . . , qk) dq1 . . . dqk
is obtained from φ(q1, . . . , qk) and ψ(q1, . . . , qk). (The deﬁnitions of FZ and FΩ
are still to be completed by the appropriate convergence proofs. We shall give
these proofs in II.3.)
In the following we shall denote the points of Hilbert space by
f, g, . . . , φ, ψ, . . .; complex numbers by a, b, . . . , x, y, . . .; and positive integers by


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
k, l, m, . . . , µ, ν. We shall also refer to Hilbert space as R∞whenever necessary
(as an abbreviation for “∞-dimensional Euclidean space,” analogous to the
customary designation Rn for “n-dimensional Euclidean space” (n = 1, 2, . . .)).
The noteworthy feature of the operations af, f ± g, (f, g) is that they are
exactly the basic operations of the vector calculus: those which make possible
the establishment of length and angle calculations in Euclidean geometry or
the calculations with force and work in the mechanics of particles. The analogy
becomes very clear in the case of FZ if, in place of the x1, x2, . . . in R∞, we
consider the ordinary points x1, . . . , xn of an Rn (for which the operations
α, β and γ can be deﬁned in the same way).
In particular, for n = 3 we
have the conditions of ordinary space. Under certain circumstances, it is more
appropriate to regard the complexes x1, . . . , xn not as points but as vectors,
directed from the point 0, . . . , 0 to the points x1, . . . , xn.
In order to deﬁne abstract Hilbert space, we then take as a basis the
fundamental vector operations af, f ± g, (f, g).
We shall consider all Rn
simultaneously with R∞, as will appear in the discussion to which we now
proceed. Therefore, where we do not wish to distinguish between R∞and the
Rn, we shall use R as the common term for the space.
First of all we postulate for R the typical vector properties:37
A. R is a linear space.
That is: an addition f +g and a “scalar” multiplication af are deﬁned in R
(for f, g elements of R, a a complex number: f + g and af belong to R), and
R has a null element.38 The well-known rules of calculation for vector algebra
then hold for this space:
f + g = g + f
(f + g) + h = f + (g + h)
(commutative law of addition)
(associative law of addition)
(a + b)f = af + bf
a(f + g) = af + ag
'
(distributive law of multiplication)
0f = 0
1f = f
'
(role of 0 and 1)
The rules of calculation notmentioned here follow directly from these postulates.
37 The characterization of Rn by A, B, C(n) originated with Weyl (see Raum,
Zeit, Materie, Berlin (1921)). If we desire to obtain R∞instead of Rn, then
C(n) must naturally be replaced by C(∞). It is in this case only that D and E
become necessary; see the discussion later in the text.
38 Besides the origin, or the null vector of R, there is also the number 0, so
that the same symbol is used for two things. The relations are such, however,
that no confusion should arise.


1. Deﬁnition of Hilbert Space
For example: the role of the null vector in addition:
f + 0 = 1 · f + 0 · f = (1 + 0) · f = 1 · f = f
Or the uniqueness of subtraction: we deﬁne −f = (−1) · f, f −g = f + (−g);
then
(f −g) + g = (f + (−g)) + g
= f + ((−g) + g)
(f + g) −g = (f + g) + (−g)
= (f + (g + (−g)))









= f + ((−1) · g + 1 · g)
= f + ((−1) + 1) · g
= f + 0 · g = f + 0 = f
Or the distributive laws of multiplication with subtraction:
a · (f −g) = a · f + a · (−g) = af + a(−(1) · g) = af + (a · (−1)) · g
= af + ((−1) · a) · g = af + (−1) · (ag) = af + (−ag)
= af −ag
(a −b)f = a · f + (−b) · f = af + ((−b)) · f = af + (−1) · (bf)
= af + (−bf) = af −bf
It is not worthwhile to pursue these matters any further; it ought to be clear
that all the rules of the linear vector calculus are valid here.
We can therefore introduce the concept of linear independence for elements
f1, . . . , fk of R in the same way as this is done for vectors:
definition 1. The elements f1, . . . , fk are linearly independent if
it follows from a1f1 + · · · + akfk = 0 (a1, . . . , ak complex numbers)
that a1 = · · · = ak = 0.
We further deﬁne the analog of the linear entities occurring in the vector
calculus (the line, plane, etc., passing through the origin), the linear manifold.
definition 2. The subset M of R is called a linear manifold if
it contains all the linear combinations a1f1 + · · · + akfk of any k
(= 1, 2, . . .) of its elements f1, . . . , fk.39 If A is an arbitrary subset
of R, then the set of all a1f1 + · · · + akfk (k = 1, 2, . . .; a1, . . . , ak
arbitrary complex numbers; f1, . . . , fk arbitrary elements of A) is a
linear manifold, which evidently contains A. It is called “the linear
manifold spanned by A,” and is symbolized by {A}.
Before we develop this concept any further, let us formulate the next basic
principle of the vector calculus, the existence of the inner product.
39 It would be suﬃcient to require: if f belongs to M then af also; if f, g
then f + g also. Then if the f1, . . . , fk belong to M, the a1f1, . . . , akfk do also,
and hence successively the a1f1 +a2f2, a1f1 +a2f2 +a3f3, . . ., a1f1 +· · ·+akfk
do too.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
B. An Hermitian inner product is deﬁned in R.
That is: (f, g) is deﬁned (f, g in R; (f, g) is a complex number), and it has
the following properties:40
(f ′ + f ′′, g) = (f ′, g) + (f ′′, g)
(a · f, g) = a · (f, g)
(f, g) = (g, f)
(f, f) ⩾0
= 0 only if f = 0
(distributive law for the ﬁrst factor)
(associative law for the ﬁrst factor)
(Hermitian symmetry)
(deﬁnite form)
In addition, the corresponding relations for the second factor follow from
the two properties of the ﬁrst factor, because of the Hermitian symmetry (we
exchange f and g, and take the complex conjugate of both sides):
(f, g′ + g′′) = (f, g′) + (f, g′′)
(f, a · g) = a · (f, g)
This inner product is of great importance, because it makes possible the
deﬁnition of length. In Euclidean space, the magnitude of a vector is deﬁned
by ∥f∥=
,
(f, f),41 and the distance between two points f, g is deﬁned by
∥f −g∥. We shall start from this point.
definition 3.
The “magnitude” of an element f
of R is
∥f∥=
,
(f, f), the distance between f, g is ∥f −g∥.42
We shall see that this concept possesses all the properties of distance. For
this purpose, we prove the following:
theorem 1.
|(f, g)| ⩽∥f∥· ∥g∥
proof: First we write
∥f∥2 + ∥g∥2 −2Re(f, g) = (f, f) + (g, g) −(f, g) −(g, f)
= (f −g, f −g) ⩾0
40 (f, f) is a real number because of the Hermitian symmetry; indeed, for
f = g this gives (f, f) = (f, f).
41 If f has the components x1, . . . , xn, then by the observations made in γ,
II.1 (if we restrict ourselves to a ﬁnite number of components),
,
(f, f) =
-
n
.
ν=1
|xν|2
/ 1
i.e., the ordinary Euclidean length.
42 Since (f, f) is real and ⩾0, ∥f∥real, and the square root is chosen ⩾0.
The same holds for ∥f −g∥.


1. Deﬁnition of Hilbert Space
Re(f, g) ⩽1
∥f∥2 + ∥g∥21
(If z = u + iv is a complex number—u, v real—then Re z, Im z represent
respectively the real and imaginary parts of z, i.e., Re z = u, Im z = v.) If we
replace f, g by af, (1/a)g (a real, > 0) then the left side is not changed, as can
easily be seen. But on the right we obtain
a2∥f∥2 + a−2∥g∥21
Since this expression is ⩾Re(f, g), the inequality holds in particular for its
minimum, which amounts to ∥f∥· ∥g∥. (This value is taken on for f, g ̸= 0 at
a =
- ∥g∥
∥f∥
/ 1
and for f = 0 or g = 0 as a →+∞or a →+0, respectively.) Therefore
Re(f, g) ⩽∥f∥· ∥g∥
If we replace f, g in this by eiαf, g (α real), then the right side of the equation
does not change (because of
(af, ag) = aa(f, f) = |a|2(f, f)
we have
∥af∥= |a| · ∥f∥
therefore, for |a| = 1, ∥af∥= ∥f∥), while the left side goes over into
Re
eiα(f, g)
= cos α Re(f, g) −sin α Im(f, g)
This clearly has a maximum
Re(f, g)
12 +
Im(f, g)
12 = |(f, g)|
from which the proposition follows:
|(f, g)| ⩽∥f∥· ∥g∥
corollary: For the equality to hold, f, g must be identical except
for a constant (complex) factor.
proof: For the equality to hold in the relation
Re(f, g) ⩽1
∥f∥2 + ∥g∥21
(f −g, f −g) must be zero; i.e., f = g. In the transition from this expression
to |(f, g)| ⩽∥f∥· ∥g∥, f, g are replaced by eiαaf, (1/a)g (a, α real, a > 0)
whenever neither f nor g = 0. In order for the equality to hold in this case we
must therefore have
eiαaf = (1/a)g,
i.e.
g = a2eiαf = cf (c ̸= 0)
Conversely, for f or g = 0, or g = cf (c ̸= 0), the equality clearly holds.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
theorem 2. ∥f∥⩾0 and = 0 only if f = 0. Also,
∥a · f∥= |a| · ∥f∥
∥f + g∥⩽∥f∥+ ∥g∥
always, the equality holding only if f, g are identical except for a
constant, real factor ⩾0.
proof: We have already seen above that the ﬁrst two propositions are correct.
We prove the inequality of the third in the following manner:
(f + g, f + g) = (f, f) + (g, g) + (f, g) + (g, f)
= ∥f∥2 + ∥g∥2 + 2Re(f, g)
⩽∥f∥2 + ∥g∥2 + 2∥f∥· ∥g∥
=
∥f∥+ ∥g∥
∥f + g∥⩽∥f∥+ ∥g∥
In order that the equality hold, Re(f, g) must be equal to ∥f∥· ∥g∥, which
requires f or g = 0, or g = a2f = cf (c real, > 0), by reason of the observations
made in the proof of the above corollary. Conversely, it is clear in this case that
the equality holds.
From theorem 2 it follows immediately that the distance ∥f −g∥has the
following properties: f, g have the distance 0 for f = g, and never otherwise.
The distance between g, f is the same as between f, g. The distance of f, h is
less than or equal to the sum of the distances f, g and g, h. The equality exists
only if g = af + (1 −a)h (a real, 0 ⩽a ⩽1).43 The distance of af, ag is |a|
times the distance of f, g.
Now these are the very same properties of the concept of length which
make it possible in geometry (and topology) to base the concepts of continuity,
limit, limit point, etc. on the concept of length. We wish to make use of this,
and deﬁne:
A function F(f) in R (i.e., for which f is deﬁned in R, and which has for
values either always points in R or always complex numbers) is continuous at
the point f0 (in R) if for each ϵ > 0 there exists a δ > 0 such that ∥f −f0∥< δ
implies ∥F(f) −F(f0)∥< ϵ or |F(f) −F(f0)| < ϵ (according to whether the
F values are points in R or complex numbers). This function is said to be
bounded in R or in a given subset of R if always ∥F(f)∥⩽C or |F(f)| ⩽C
(C a constant, suitably chosen, but ﬁxed). Analogous deﬁnitions hold for several
variables. A sequence f1, f2, . . . converges to f, or has the limit f, if the numbers
43 By theorem 2 (which is applied here to f −g, g−h), f −g = 0; i.e., g = f
or g −h = 0; i.e., g = h or g −h = c (f −g) (c real, > 0); i.e., g =
c
c+1f +
c+1h;
i.e., g = af + (1 −a)h with a respectively equal to 1, 0,
c
c+1 . Geometrically,
this means that the point g is collinear with f, h.


1. Deﬁnition of Hilbert Space
∥f1 −f∥, ∥f2 −f∥, . . . converge to zero. A point is a limit point of a set A
(subset of R!) if it is a limit of a sequence from A.44 In particular, A is said to
be closed if it contains all its limit points, and it is said to be everywhere dense
if its limit points encompass all of A.
We have yet to prove that af, f + g, (f, g) are continuous in all their
variables. Since
∥af −af ′∥= |a| · ∥f −f ′∥
∥(f + g) −(f ′ + g′)∥= ∥(f −f ′) + (g + g′)∥⩽∥f −f ′∥+ ∥g −g′∥
the ﬁrst two propositions are clearly true. Furthermore, from
∥f −f ′∥< ϵ,
∥g −g′∥< ϵ
if we substitute f ′ −f = φ, g′ −g = ψ, it follows that
|(f, g) −(f ′, g′)| = |(f, g) −(f + φ, g + ψ)|
= |(φ, g) + (f, ψ) + (φ, ψ)|
⩽|(φ, g)| + |(f, ψ)| + |(φ, ψ)|
⩽∥φ∥· ∥g∥+ ∥f∥· ∥ψ∥+ ∥φ∥· ∥ψ∥
⩽ϵ
∥f∥+ ∥g∥+ ϵ
As ϵ →0 this expression approaches zero, and can be made smaller than any
δ > 0.
The properties A, B permit us, as we see, to state a great deal about R, yet
they are not suﬃcient to enable us to distinguish the Rn from each other and
from R∞. No mention has been made so far of the number of dimensions. This
concept is clearly associated with the maximum number of linearly independent
vectors. If n = 0, 1, 2, . . . then we state for this n:
C(n). There are exactly n linearly independent vectors. That
is, it is possible to specify n such vectors, but not n + 1.
If there exists no maximum number, then we have:
C(∞). There are arbitrarily many linearly independent vectors.
That is, for each k = 1, 2, . . . we can specify k such vectors.
C is then not an essentially new postulate. If A, B hold, then either C(n)
or C(∞) must hold. We obtain a diﬀerent space R depending upon which we
decide upon. We shall see that if follows from C(n) that R has all the properties
of the n-dimensional (complex) Euclidean space. C(∞), on the other hand, is
44 The following deﬁnition of the limit point is also useful: for each ϵ > 0 let
there be an f ′ of A with ∥f −f ′∥< ϵ. The equivalence of the two deﬁnitions
can be shown exactly as in ordinary analysis.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
not suﬃcient to guarantee the essential identity of R with the Hilbert space R∞.
Rather, we need two additional postulates D, E. More precisely, the situation is
the following: We shall show that an R with A, B, C has all the properties of
Rn, in particular the D, E, which will be formulated (and which therefore follow
from A, B, C(∞)). Furthermore, we shall show that an R with A, B, C, D, E
has all the properties of R∞, but that in this case D, E are essential (i.e., they
do not follow from A, B, C(∞)). We therefore proceed to the formulation of
D, E, but the proof that all Rn, R∞possess these properties will only be given
later (see II.3).
D. R is complete.45
That is, if a sequence f1, f2, . . . in R satisﬁes the Cauchy convergence criterion
(for each ϵ > 0 there exists an N = N(ϵ) such that ∥fm −fn∥< ϵ for all
m, n > N), then it is convergent; i.e., it possesses a limit f (see the deﬁnition
of this concept given above).
E. R is separable.45
That is, there is a sequence f1, f2, . . . in R that is everywhere dense in R.
In II.2 we shall, as we have said, develop the “geometry” of R from these
basic assumptions, and will be led to distinguish two cases: Rn and R∞.
2. THE GEOMETRY OF HILBERT SPACE
We begin with two deﬁnitions: The ﬁrst contains as much of trigonometry
as is necessary for our purposes: the concept of right angle—orthogonality.
definition 4. Two f, g of R are orthogonal if (f, g) = 0. Two
linear manifolds M and N are orthogonal if each element of M is
orthogonal to each element of N. A set O is called an orthonormal
set if for all f, g of O
(f, g) =
1 for f = g
0 for f ̸= g
(i.e., each pair of elements are orthogonal and each element has the
magnitude 1).46 Furthermore, O is complete if it is not a subset of
any other normal set that contains additional elements.47
45 We use the topological term for brevity (see Hausdorﬀ, Mengenlehre,
Berlin, 1927); it is explained further below in the text.
46 Indeed, ∥f∥=
,
(f, f) = 1.
47 As we see, complete orthonormal sets correspond to the cartesian
coordinate systems (i.e., the unit vectors pointing in the directions of the axes)
in Rn.


2. The Geometry of Hilbert Space
We observe further: That the orthonormal set is complete means obviously
that no f exists, with ∥f∥= 1, which is orthogonal to the whole O (see Note
46). But if f were merely diﬀerent from zero, and orthogonal to the whole set
O, then all of the above would be satisﬁed for
f ′ =
∥f∥· f
(of course, ∥f∥> 0):
∥f ′∥=
∥f∥∥f∥= 1
:
f ′ orthogonal to O
Therefore, the completeness of O means that each f orthogonal to the entire
set must vanish.
The second deﬁnition is such that it is important only in R∞, since in
Rn every linear manifold is of the type described by it (see the end of II.3).
Therefore we cannot give an intuitive-geometrical picture of its meaning.
definition 5. A linear manifold which is also closed is called a
closed linear manifold. If A is any set in R, and we add to {A} (the
linear manifold spanned by A) all its limit points, we obtain a closed
linear manifold that contains A. It is also a subset of every other
closed linear manifold which contains A.48 We call it the closed
linear manifold spanned by A, and symbolize it by [A].
We now go on to the more detailed analysis of R, in particular of complete
orthogonal sets. For theorems which require C(n) or C(∞), D, E in addition to
A, B we add the index (n) or (∞) respectively. Such indices are omitted for those
theorems which are common to both cases.
theorem 3(n). Every orthonormal set has ⩽n elements, and is
complete if and only if it has n elements.
note.
It follows from the ﬁrst proposition that there exists a
maximal value for the numbers of elements of orthonormal sets;
those orthonormal sets for which this maximal value is reached
are by deﬁnition complete.
By virtue of this theorem, complete
orthonormal sets exist in the case C(n) and every such set has n
elements.
proof: Each orthonormal set is (if it is ﬁnite) linearly independent. If the
elements are φ1, φ2, . . . , φm if follows from
a1φ1 + · · · + amφm = 0
48 As a linear manifold, this must contain {A}, and since it is closed, also
the limit points of {A}.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
by forming the inner product with φµ (µ = 1, 2, . . . , m) that aµ = 0. So, by
C(n), the set cannot have n+1 elements. An arbitrary orthonormal set therefore
can have no subsets with n + 1 elements. Therefore it is ﬁnite and has ⩽n
elements.
A set with n elements permits no extension, and is therefore complete. But
with m < n elements, φ1, φ2, . . . , φm is not complete. Indeed, among the linear
combinations a1φ1 + · · · + amφm there cannot be n > m linearly independent
ones.
Hence there must exist, by C(n), an element f which diﬀers from all
a1φ1 + · · · + amφm, i.e., for which
ψ = f −a1φ1 −· · · −amφm
is always diﬀerent from zero.
Now (ψ, φµ) = 0 means that aµ = (f, φµ)
(µ = 1, 2, . . . , m). Therefore this condition can be satisﬁed for all µ = 1, 2, . . . , m
simultaneously, thus furnishing a ψ which shows that the set φ1, φ2, . . . , φm is
incomplete.
theorem 3(∞). Every orthonormal set is a ﬁnite or a countably
inﬁnite set; if it is complete then it is certainly inﬁnite.
note. We can therefore write all orthonormal sets as sequences:
φ1, φ2, . . . (perhaps being terminated; i.e., ﬁnite), which we shall
actually do.
It should be observed that the inﬁnite number of
elements of the set is necessary for its completeness, but, unlike
the case C(n), it is not suﬃcient.49
proof: Let O be an orthonormal set, f, g two diﬀerent elements belonging to
it. Then
(f −g, f −g) = (f, f) + (g, g) −(f, g) −(g, f) = 2
∥f −g∥=
√
Now let f1, f2, . . . be the sequence which is everywhere dense in R. This sequence
exists by postulate E. For each f of O there exists an fm of the sequence for
which ∥f −fm∥< 1
√
2. The corresponding fm, fn for f, g must be diﬀerent,
because it would follow from fm = fn that
∥f −g∥= ∥(f −fm) −(g −fm)
⩽∥f −fm∥+ ∥g −fm∥
< 1
√
2 + 1
√
2 =
√
Therefore, to each f of O there corresponds an fm of the sequence f1, f2, . . .
with diﬀerent fm for diﬀerent f. Therefore O is ﬁnite or is a sequence.
49 Let φ1, φ2, φ3, . . . be complete. Then φ2, φ3, . . . is not complete, but it is
still inﬁnite!


2. The Geometry of Hilbert Space
As in the proof of theorem 3(∞) we show the following: if there are > m
linearly independent elements in R, a set φ1, φ2, . . . , φm cannot be complete.
But since by C(∞) this holds for all m, a complete set must be inﬁnite.
The theorems which now follow, insofar as they are concerned with
convergence, apply only to C(∞), but it is more desirable to formulate them
generally, because of their other implications.
theorem 4. Let φ1, φ2, . . . be an orthonormal set. Then all series
!
ν(f, φν)(g, φν), insofar as they have inﬁnitely many terms, are
absolutely convergent. In particular, for f = g, !
ν |(f, φν)|2 ⩽|f|2.
proof: Let aν = (f, φν), ν = 1, 2, . . . , N.
Then f −!N
ν−1 aνφν = ψ is
orthogonal to all φν, ν = 1, 2, . . . , N (see the proof of theorem 3(n)). Since
f = !N
ν=1 aνφν + ψ then
(f, f) =
N
.
µ,ν=1
aµaν(φµ, φν) +
N
.
ν=1
aν(φν, ψ) +
N
.
ν=1
aν(ψ, φν) + (ψ, ψ)
=
N
.
ν=1
|aν|2 + (ψ, ψ)
⩾
N
.
ν=1
|aν|2
i.e., !N
ν=1 |aν|2 ⩽∥f∥2. If the set φ1, φ2, . . . is ﬁnite, then it follows directly
that !N
ν=1 |aν|2 = ∥f∥2; if it is inﬁnite, then N →∞results in the absolute
convergence of !
ν |aν|2, as well as in the fact that it is ⩽∥f∥2. This establishes
the second proposition. Because of
|(f, φν)(g, φν)| ⩽1
|(f, φν)|2 + |(g, φν)|25
the more general convergence statement of the ﬁrst proposition follows from
the fact of convergence just stated.
theorem 5. Let φ1, φ2, . . . be an inﬁnite orthonormal set. Then
the series !∞
ν=1 xνφν converges if and only if !∞
ν=1 |xν|2 does (the
latter series has as its terms real, non-negative numbers, and is
therefore convergent or else diverges to +∞).
proof: Since this proposition has signiﬁcance only for C(∞), we may then use D,
the Cauchy criterion for convergence.
The sum !∞
ν=1 xνφν then converges;
i.e., the sequence of partial sums !N
ν=1 xνφν converges as N →∞, if for each
ϵ > 0 such that for L, M > N, ∥!L
ν=1 xνφν −!M
ν=1 xνφν∥< ϵ. We assume
L > M ⩾N, then
∥
L
.
ν=1
xνφν −
M
.
ν=1
xνφν∥= ∥
L
.
ν=M+1
xνφν∥< ϵ


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
∥
L
.
ν=M+1
xνφν∥2 =
L
.
ν=M+1
xνφν,
L
.
ν=M+1
xνφν
=
L
.
µ,ν=M+1
xµxν(φµ, φν)
=
L
.
ν=M+1
|xν|2
=
L
.
ν=1
|xν|2 −
M
.
ν=1
|xν|2
therefore
0 ⩽
L
.
ν=1
|xν|2 −
M
.
ν=1
|xν|2 < ϵ2
But this is exactly the Cauchy convergence criterion for the sequence
N
.
ν=1
|xν|2
:
N →∞
i.e., for the series !∞
ν=1 |xν|2.
corollary. For f = !
ν xνφν, (f, φν) = xν (regardless of whether
the orthogonal set is ﬁnite or inﬁnite—in the latter case, of course,
convergence is assumed).
proof: For N ⩾ν we have
N
.
µ=1
xµφµ, φν
=
N
.
µ=1
xµ(φµ, φν) = xν
For a ﬁnite set φ1, φ2, . . . we can set N equal to the highest index; for inﬁnite
sets φ1, φ2, . . . we can let N →∞because of the continuity of the inner product.
In either case, (f, φν) = xν results.
theorem 6 . Let φ1, φ2, . . . be an orthonormal set, f arbitrary.
Then f ′ = !
ν xνφν, xν = (f, φν) (ν = 1, 2, . . .) is always convergent
if the series is inﬁnite.
The expression f −f ′ is orthogonal to
φ1, φ2, . . .
proof: The convergence follows from theorems 4 & 5, and according to the
corollary of theorem 5
(f ′, φν) = xν = (f, φν),
(f −f ′, φν) = 0
After these preparations, we can give the general criteria; i.e., even for
C(∞), for the completeness of an orthonormal set.


2. The Geometry of Hilbert Space
theorem 7. Let φ1, φ2, . . . be an orthonormal set. For completeness,
each one of the following conditions is necessary and suﬃcient:
α) The closed linear manifold [φ1, φ2, . . .] spanned by φ1, φ2, . . . is
equal to R.
β) It is always true that f = !
ν xνφν, xν = (f, φν) (ν = 1, 2, . . . ,
convergence by theorem 6).
γ ) It is always true that
(f, g) =
.
ν
(f, φν)(g, φν)
(absolute convergence by theorem 4).
proof: If φ1, φ2, . . . is complete, then f = !
ν xνφν is equal to zero (xν = (f, φν),
ν = 1, 2, . . .), since it is orthogonal to φ1, φ2, . . . by theorem 6. Then β is
satisﬁed. If β holds, then each f is the limit of its partial sums !N
ν=1 xνφν
N →∞(if N is inﬁnite) and therefore belongs to [φ1, φ2, . . .].
Therefore
[φ1, φ2, . . .] = R; i.e., α is satisﬁed. If α holds, then we may argue as follows:
If f is orthogonal to all φ1, φ2, . . . then it is also orthogonal to their linear
combinations, and by reason of continuity also to their limit points; i.e., to all
[φ1, φ2, . . .]. Therefore it is orthogonal to all R, and hence to itself, (f, f) = 0,
f = 0. Consequently, φ1, φ2, . . . is complete.
We have then the logical scheme:
completeness →β →α →completeness
i.e., α, β have been shown to be necessary and suﬃcient.
From γ it follows that if f is orthogonal to φ1, φ2, . . ., and if we set f = g,
then we obtain (f, f) = !
ν 0 · 0 = 0, f = 0; i.e., φ1, φ2, . . . is complete. On the
other hand, from β (which is now equivalent to completeness),
(f, g) = lim
N→∞
N
.
µ=1
(f, φµ) · φµ ,
N
.
ν=1
(g, φν) · φν
= lim
N→∞
N
.
µ,ν=1
(f, φµ)(g, φν) · (φµ, φν)
= lim
N→∞
N
.
ν=1
(f, φν)(g, φν) =
∞
.
ν=1
(f, φν)(g, φν)
(if the set is ﬁnite,then the limitprocess is unnecessary); i.e.,γ is also a necessary
and suﬃcient condition.
theorem 8. To each setf1, f2, . . . there corresponds an orthonormal
set φ1, φ2, . . . which spans the same linear manifold as the former
set (both sets can be ﬁnite).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
proof: First we replace f1, f2, . . . by a subset g1, g2, . . . which spans the same
linear manifold and which consists of linearly independent elements. This may
be done as follows. Let g1 be the ﬁrst fn which is diﬀerent from zero; g2 be the
ﬁrst fn which is diﬀerent from a1g1; g3 be the ﬁrst fn which is diﬀerent from
all a1g1 + a2g2; . . . (if for any p there exists no fn which is diﬀerent from all
a1f1+a2f2+· · ·+apfp we terminate the set with gp). These g1, g2, . . . obviously
furnish the desired result.
We now form
γ1 = g1 ,
φ1 =
∥γ1∥· γ1
γ2 = g2 −(g2, φ1) · φ1 ,
φ2 =
∥γ2∥· γ2
γ3 = g3 −(g3, φ1) · φ1 −(g3, φ2) · φ2 ,
φ3 =
∥γ3∥· γ3
(this is the well-known Schmidt orthogonalization process).Each φp construction
is actually possible; i.e., the denominators ∥γp∥are all diﬀerent from zero. For
otherwise, if γp = 0, then gp would be a linear combination of the φ1, . . . , φp−1;
i.e., of the g1, . . . , gp−1, which is contrary to the hypothesis. Furthermore, it is
clear that gp is a linear combination of the φ1, . . . , φp and φp is a linear combi-
nation of the g1, . . . , gp. Therefore g1, . . . , gp and φ1, . . . , φp determine the same
linear manifold.
Finally, by construction ∥φp∥= 1, and for q < p, (γp, φq) = 0, therefore
(γp, γq) = 0. Since we can interchange p, q, the latter statement holds for p ̸= q.
Therefore φ1, φ2, . . . is an orthonormal set.
theorem 9. Corresponding to each closed linear manifold M there
is an orthonormal set which spans the same M as a closed linear
manifold.
proof: In the case C(n) this theorem is immediate: Because M satisﬁes A, B,
C(n), each linear manifold M in R satisﬁes A, B, C(m) with m ⩽n, so that
the note on theorem 3(n) is applicable to M: There is an orthonormal set
φ1, . . . , φm which is complete in M. Because of theorem 7 α, this is exactly
the proposition to be proved. (As can be seen, the premise of the closed nature
of M is itself unnecessary, since it is actually proved. In this case, compare the
statements concerning definition 5.)
In the case C(∞), we recall that R is separable according to E. We want to
show that M is also separable—in general, that each subset of R is separable.
For this purpose, we form a sequence f1, f2, . . . everywhere dense in R (see E
in II.1), and for each fn and m = 1, 2, . . . we form the sphere Sn,m consisting of
all f with ∥f −fm∥< 1
m. For each Sn,m which contains points of M, we select
one such point: gn,m. For some n, m this gn,m may be undeﬁned, but the deﬁned


2. The Geometry of Hilbert Space
points form a sequence in M.50 Now let f be any point in M and ϵ > 0. Then
there exists an m with
m < 1
2 ϵ, and an fn with ∥fn −f∥<
m. Since Sn,m
then contains a point of M (namely f), gnm is deﬁned, and ∥fn −gnm∥<
m,
therefore ∥f −gnm∥<
m < ϵ. Consequently, f is the limit point of the gnm
thus deﬁned; hence this sequence yields the desired result.
We shall denote by f1, f2, . . . the sequence from M, everywhere dense in M.
The closed linear manifold determined by it, [f1, f2, . . .], contains all its limit
points, and hence all M; but, since M is a closed linear manifold, and f1, f2, . . .
belong to it, therefore [f1, f2, . . .] is a part of M—therefore it is equal to M. We
now choose the orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . by theorem 8. Then
{φ1, φ2, . . .} = {f1, f2, . . .}
and if we add the limit points to both sides we obtain
[φ1, φ2, . . .] = [ f1, f2, . . .] = M
But this was our proposition.
We now need only put M = R in theorem 9 and we have by theorem 7α
a complete orthonormal setφ1, φ2, . . .So we see: There are complete orthonormal
sets. On the basis of this we can now show that R is an Rn or an R∞(according
to whether C(n) or C(∞) holds); i.e., all its properties are completely determined.
It is only necessary to show that R allows a one-to-one mapping on the
set of all {x1, . . . , xn} or of all {x1, x2, . . .} ( !∞
ν=1 |xν|2 ﬁnite) respectively, in
such a way that
1◦
af ←→{ax1, ax2, . . .}
follows from
f ←→{x1, x2, . . .}
2◦
f + g ←→{x1 + y1, x2 + y2, . . .}
follows from
f ←→{x1, x2, . . .}
g ←→{y1, y2, . . .}
3◦
(f, g) =
n or ∞
.
ν=1
xνyν
follows from
f ←→{x1, x2, . . .}
g ←→{y1, y2, . . .}
(In the inﬁnite case in 3◦the absolute convergence must be shown.) We now
specify the mapping f ←→{x1, x2, . . .}.
Let φ1, φ2, . . . be a complete orthonormal set; in case C(n) it terminates
with φn, in case C(∞) is inﬁnite (theorems 3(n) & 3(∞)). We set
f =
n or ∞
.
ν=1
xνφν
By theorem 5 this series converges even in the inﬁnite case (since !∞
ν=1 |xν|2
is ﬁnite); i.e., the elements of either Rn or R∞are exhausted. By theorem 7β
50 It should be recalled that a double sequence gnm (n, m = 1, 2, . . .) can also
be written as a simple sequence: g11, g12, g21, g13, g22, g31, . . .


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
and because
n or ∞
.
ν=1
|(f, φν)|2
is ﬁnite (theorem 4) the elements of R are also exhausted (xν = (f, φν) is to
be substituted). It is clear that only one f corresponds to each {x1, x2, . . .},
while the converse follows from the corollary to theorem 5.
Statements 1◦, 2◦are obviously satisﬁed, while 3◦follows from theorem 7γ.
3. DIGRESSION ON THE CONDITIONS A–E 51
We must still verify the proposition 2 at the end of 1.4: That FZ, FΩ
actually satisfy the conditions A–E. For this purpose, it is suﬃcient to consider
FΩ, because we have already shown in II.2 that an R with A–E must be identical
in all properties with R∞; i.e., with FΩ, so that A–E must be valid for FZ also.
Moreover, we shall show the independence of the conditions D, E from A–C(n),
mentioned in II.2, as well as the fact that they follow from A–C(n); i.e., that
they hold in Rn. These three purely mathematical questions form the subject
matter of this section.
We begin with the veriﬁcation of A–E in FΩ. For this we must rely upon
the Lebesgue concept of the integral, for whose foundations reference should be
made to special works on the subject.52 (The Lebesgue integral is of importance
to us only upon this occasion, and a knowledge of it is not necessary for the
later chapters).
In I.4 we had introduced Ωas the k-dimensional space of the q1, . . . , qk and
FΩas the totality of all functions f(q1, . . . , qk) with ﬁnite
"
· · ·
"
#
$%
&
Ω
|f(q1, . . . , qk)|2 dq1 . . . dqk
We now allow all the q1, . . . , qk to vary from −∞to +∞. All our deductions
would of course remain valid, and even the proofs would be carried over for the
most part verbatim, if we were to limit the range of the q1, . . . , qk (so that Ω
would be, for example, a half space, or the inside of a cube, or the inside of a
sphere, or the outside of these ﬁgures, etc.)—indeed even if we were to choose
Ωas a curved surface (e.g., as the surface of a sphere, etc.). But in order not
to become lost in unnecessary complications (whose discussion can be carried
out without diﬃculty by the reader himself, with the aid of our typical proof)
51 This section is not necessary for the understanding of the later portions of
the text.
52 For example, Carath´eodory, Vorlesungen ¨uber reelle Functionen, Leipzig,
1927, in particular pp. 237-274; Kamke, Das Lebesguesche Integral, Leipzig,
1925.


3. Digression on the Conditions A–E
we limit ourselves to the simplest case just mentioned. We shall now go through
A–E consecutively.
For A: We must show: If f, g belong to FΩthen af, f +g belong to it; i.e., if
!
Ω
|f|2 ,
!
Ω
|g|2
(we abbreviate
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|f(q1, . . . , qk)|2 dq1 . . . , dqk ,
!
· · ·
!
"
#$
%
Ω
|g(q1, . . . , qk)|2 dq1 . . . , dqk
since no confusion can result) are ﬁnite, then
!
Ω
|af|2 = |a|2
!
Ω
|f|2
and
!
Ω
|f ± g|2
are also ﬁnite. The ﬁrst case is trivial, while the second is established, because
of |f + g|2 = |f|2 + |g|2 ± 2Re (f ¯g),53 as soon as the ﬁnite nature of
!
Ω
|f · ¯g| =
!
Ω
|f||g|
is ascertained. But since |f||g| ⩽1
&
|f|2 + |g|2'
, this follows directly from the
hypothesis.
For B: We deﬁne (f, g) as
(
Ωf¯g. This integral is, as we have already seen,
absolutely convergent. All properties postulated in B are apparent except the
last: That (f, f) = 0 implies f ≡0. Now (f, f) = 0 means that
(
Ω|f|2 = 0,
so the set of points for which |f|2 > 0, i.e., f(q1, . . . , qk) ̸= 0, must have
Lebesgue measure 0. If we now consider two functions f, g for which f ̸= g (i.e.,
f(q1, . . . , qk) ̸= g(q1, . . . , qk)) holds only on a q1, . . . , qk set of Lebesgue measure
0 as not being essentially diﬀerent,54 then we can assert that f ≡0.
For C: Let O1, . . . , On be n domains in Ω, no two of which have a point in
common, and let the Lebesgue measure of all be greater than zero, but ﬁnite.
Let fℓ(q1, . . . , qk) be 1 in Oℓand zero elsewhere. Since
(
Ω|fℓ|2 is equal to the
measure of Oℓit belongs to FΩ(ℓ= 1, . . . , n). These f1, . . . , fn are linearly
independent. For a1f1 +· · ·+anfn ≡0 means that the function on the left fails
to vanish only in a set of measure 0. It therefore has roots in each Oℓ, but since
it is a constant aℓin Oℓ, then aℓ= 0; ℓ= 1, . . . , n. This construction holds for
all n, so that C(∞) holds.
53 In general
|x + y|2 = (x + y)(¯x + ¯y) = x¯x + y¯y + (x¯y + ¯xy)
= |x|2 + |y|2 + 2Re (x¯y)
54 This is customary in the theory of the Lebesgue integral.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
For D: Let the sequence f1, f2, . . . satisfy the Cauchy criterion; i.e., for each
ϵ > 0 there exists an N = N(ϵ) such that
(
Ω|fm −fn|2 < ϵ whenever m, n ⩾N.
We chose n1 = N( 1
8); n2 = N( 1
82 ) ⩾n1; n3 = N( 1
83 ) ⩾n1, n2; . . . . Then
n1 ⩽n2 ⩽· · · ⩽nν = N( 1
8 ν ) ⩽nν+1, hence
!
Ω
|fnν+1 −fnν|2 < 1
8ν
Let us now consider the set P (ν) of all points for which
|fnν+1 −fnν| > 1
2ν
If its Lesbegue measure is µ(ν) then
!
Ω
|fnν+1 −fnν|2 ⩾µ(ν)) 1
2ν
*2
= µ(ν)
4ν
< 1
8ν
=⇒µ(ν) < 1
2ν
Let us also consider the set Q(ν) which consists of the union of
P (ν), P (ν+1), P (ν+2), . . . . Its Lesbegue measure is
⩽µ(ν) + µ(ν+1) + µ(ν+2) + · · · < 1
2ν +
2ν+1 +
2ν+2 + · · · =
2ν−1
Outside of Q(ν) it is true that
|fnν+1 −fnν
| <
2ν
|fnν+2 −fnν+1| <
2ν+1
|fnν+3 −fnν+2| <
2ν+2
...
Therefore, in general, for ν ⩽ν ′ ⩽ν ′′
|fnν ′′ −fnν ′ | ⩽
|fnν ′+1 −fnν ′
|
+ |fnν ′+2 −fnν ′+1| + · · · + |fnν ′′ −fnν ′′−1|
<
2ν ′ +
2ν ′+1 + · · · +
2ν ′′−1
<
2ν ′−1
As ν ′ −→∞this approaches zero independently of ν ′′; i.e., the sequence
fn1, fn2, . . . fulﬁlls the Cauchy criterion in the case that the q1, . . . , qk do not lie
in Q(ν). Since we are dealing with numbers (for ﬁxed q1, . . . , qk), this sequence
also converges. Therefore we can say conversely: If the fn1, fn2, . . . sequence
does not converge for a certain q1, . . . , qk then this lies in Q(ν). Let the set of


3. Digression on the Conditions A–E
all q1, . . . , qk for which convergence does not occur be Q. Then Q is a subset
of Q(ν), its measure is therefore not larger than that of Q(ν); i.e., <
2ν−1 . This
must be true for all ν, although Q is deﬁned independently of ν. Therefore
Q has the Lebesgue measure 0. Consequently, nothing is changed if we, for
example, set all fn in Q equal to zero (see Note 54). But then fn1, fn2, . . .
converges also in Q, and hence everywhere.
We have thus speciﬁed a subsequence fn1, fn2, . . . of f1, f2, . . . which
converges at all points q1, . . . , qk (this need not be the case for f1, f2, . . .). Let
the limit of fn1, fn2, . . . be f(q1, . . . , qk). We must then prove: 1. f belongs to
FΩ; i.e.,
(
Ω|f|2 is ﬁnite; 2. f is the limit of fn1, fn2, . . . not only in the sense of
convergence for each q1, . . . , qk but also in the sense of “length convergence” of
Hilbert space; i.e., ∥f −fn2∥→0 or
(
Ω|f −fn2|2 →0; 3. In this sense it is also
the limit of the entire sequence f1, f2, . . . ; i.e., ∥f −fn∥→0 or
(
Ω|f −fn|2 →0.
Let ϵ > 0, and let ν0 be chosen with nν0 ⩾N(ϵ) (for example,
8ν0 ⩽ϵ),
and ν ⩾ν0, n ⩾N(ϵ). Then
(
Ω|fnν −fn|2 < ϵ. If we set ν →∞then the
integrand approaches |f −fn|2, therefore
(
Ω|f −fn|2 ⩽ϵ (according to the
convergence theorem of Lebesgue integrals: see Note 52). Consequently, ﬁrst,
(
Ω|f −fn|2 is ﬁnite; i.e., f −fn in FΩ; also, since fn belongs to FΩ, f does
likewise: 1. is then proved. Second, it follows from the above inequality that
(
Ω|f −fn|2 →0 as n →∞; i.e., 2. and 3. are proved.
For E: We must specify a function sequence f1, f2, . . . everywhere dense
in FΩ.
Let Ω1, Ω2, . . . be a sequence of regions in Ω, each of which has a ﬁnite
measure, and which cover the entire Ω. (For example, let ΩN be a sphere of
radius N about the origin. Let f = f(q1, . . . , qk) be any element of FΩ. We
deﬁne an fN = fN(q1, . . . , qk) for each N = 1, 2, . . . :
fN(q1, . . . , qk) =



f(q1, . . . , qk)
. if q1, . . . , qk are in ΩN
and |f(q1, . . . .qk)| ⩽N
otherwise
As N →∞, fN(q1, . . . , qk) →f(q1, . . . , qk) (from a certain N on, equality is
obtained), therefore |f −fN|2 ⩽f 2. The integrals
!
Ω
|f −fN|2
are therefore dominated by
(
Ω|f|2 (ﬁnite). Since the integrands approach zero,
the integrals do likewise (see the convergence theorem cited above).
Let the class of all functions g = g(q1, . . . , qk) for which the set of all
points with g ̸= 0 has ﬁnite measure, and which satisﬁes an inequality |g| ⩽C
throughout all space, with arbitrary but ﬁxed C, be called G. The above fN
all belong to G. Therefore C is everywhere dense (in FΩ).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Let g belong to G, ϵ > 0. Let the measure of the g ̸= 0 set be M, and the
upper bound for |g| be C. We chose a series of rational numbers
−C < ρ1 < ρ2 < · · · < ρt < C
such that
ρ1 < −C + ϵ, ρ2 < ρ1 + ϵ, . . . , ρt < ρt−1 + ϵ, C < ρt + ϵ
which can easily be done. We now change each Re g(q1, . . . , qk) value into the
nearest ρs (s = 1, 2, . . . , t), only we let zero remain zero. Then a new function
h1(q1, . . . , qk) is obtained which diﬀers from Re g everywhere by less than ϵ. In
the same way, we construct an h2(q1, . . . , qk) for Im g. Then for h = h1 + ih2
!
Ω
|g −h|2 =
!
Ω
|Re g −h1|2 +
!
Ω
|Im g −h2|2
⩽Mϵ2 + Mϵ2 = 2Mϵ2
∥g −h∥⩽
√
2M ϵ
If δ >0 is given, then we set ϵ < δ/
√
2M and then ∥g −h∥< δ.
Let the class of all functions h = h(q1, . . . , qk) which take on only a ﬁnite
number of diﬀerent values, actually only those of the form ρ + iσ, ρ, σ rational,
and each such value, except zero, only on sets of measure 0, be called H. The
above h belong to H, therefore H is everywhere dense in G, and therefore in
FΩalso.
Let Π be a set of ﬁnite Lebesgue measure.
We deﬁne a function
fΠ = fΠ(q1, . . . , qk):
fΠ(q1, . . . , qk) =
/ 1 in Π
0 elsewhere
The class H obviously consists of all
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)fΠs
(t = 1, 2, . . . ; ρs, σs rational)
We now seek a Π-set sequence Π(1), Π(2), . . . with the following property:
for each ϵ > 0 there exists a Π(n) such that the measure of all points which
belong to Π but not to Π(n), or to Π(n) but not to Π, is < ϵ (this set is known
as the diﬀerence set Π(n) of Π). If we have such a sequence, then the
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)fΠ(ns)
(t = 1, 2, . . . ; ρs, σs rational; ns = 1, 2, . . .) are everywhere dense inH, because


3. Digression on the Conditions A–E
if we choose for each Πs the Π(ns) according to the above discussion, then
!
Ω
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)fΠs −
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)f
Π(ns)
⩽
t
s=1
5!
Ω
44(ρs + iσs)fΠs −(ρs + iσs)f
Π(ns)
=
t
s=1
(ρ2s + σ2s)
!
Ω
44fΠs −f
Π(ns)
=
t
s=1
(ρ2s + σ2s) · measure of the diﬀerence set
&
Πs, Π(ns)'
<
t
s=1
(ρ2s + σ2s) · ϵ =
)
t
s=1
ρ2s + σ2s
*√ϵ
If a δ > 0 is given, then
ϵ = δ28)
t
s=1
ρ2s + σ2s
*2
supplies the result
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)fΠs −
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)fΠ(ns)
999 < δ
But the
t
s=1
(ρs + iσs)fΠ(ns)
form a sequence, if we order them appropriately.
This can be done in the
following way: Let the common denominator of all ρ1, σ1, . . . , ρt, σt be τ, and
the new numerators be ρ′
1, σ ′
1, . . . , ρ′
t, σ ′
t, then the relation becomes
1τ
t
s=1
(ρ′
s + iσ ′
s)fΠ(ns)
in which we have t, τ = 1, 2, . . . ; ρ′
s, σ ′
s = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . ; ns = 1, 2, . . . for
s = 1, . . . , t. To order these functions as a sequence is the identical problem as
doing the same thing for the integers t, τ, ρ′
1, σ ′
1, . . . , ρ′
t, σ ′
t, n1, . . . , nt. Among
these complexes of numbers group together those for which the positive integer
I = t + τ + |ρ′
1| + |σ ′
1| + · · · + |ρ′
t| + |σ ′
t| + n1 + · · · nt
has the same value. Then arrange these groups in the order of increase of their
indices I. Each one of these groups (with ﬁxed I) consists obviously of a ﬁnite


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
number of the complexes in question. If we now arrange each one of these ﬁnite
sets in any order, we have in fact obtained a simple sequence containing all the
complexes.
In order to be able to specify the set sequence Π(1), Π(2), . . . mentioned, we
make use of the fact that for each set Π with ﬁnite Lebesgue measure M, and
for each δ > 0, there exists an open point set Π′ which covers Π, but whose
measure exceeds it by < δ (see the references of Note 52 and Note 45, where
the concept “open point set” has been deﬁned). For each open Π′ and a δ > 0,
there obviously exists a set Π′′ consisting of a ﬁnite number of cubes, which
is contained in Π′, and whose measure is less than that of Π′ by < δ. Clearly
the lengths of the edges of these cubes and their center coordinates can all be
chosen rational. We now easily recognize that the “diﬀerence set” of Π, Π′′, as
deﬁned above, has measure < δ+δ = 2δ and therefore for δ = 1
2ϵ a measure < ϵ.
We have then accomplished our purpose, if we can order a sequence of sets of
cubes of the type just described.
These sets of cubes are now characterized by the number of their cubes
n = 1, 2, . . . , together with the lengths of their edges κ(ν) and the coordinates
of their center points ξ(ν)
1 , . . . , ξ(ν)
k
(ν = 1, . . . , n). The κ(ν), ξ(ν)
1 , . . . , ξ(ν)
k
are
rational. Let their common denominator (for all ν = 1, . . . , n) be η = 1, 2, . . . ,
their numerators
κ′(ν) = 1, 2, . . . ;
ξ ′(ν)
1 , . . . , ξ ′(ν)
k
= 0, ±1, ±2, . . .
Then our sets of cubes are characterized by the complexes of numbers
n, η, κ′(1), ξ ′(1)
1 , . . . , ξ ′(1)
k , . . . , κ′(n), ξ ′(n)
1 , . . . , ξ ′(n)
k
If we arrange these in the order of increase of the positive integers
n + η + κ′(1) + |ξ ′(1)
1 | + · · · + |ξ ′(n)
k | + · · · + κ′(n) + |ξ ′(n)
1 | + · · · + |ξ ′(n)
k |
then we obtain a simple sequence, exactly as in the earlier analogous case of
the linear combinations of functions.
Before we continue, let us answer the following question: Given an R
satisfying A–E (with C(∞)), in which subsets M of R are A–E again satisﬁed
(with unchanged deﬁnitions of af, f ± g as well as (f, g))?
In order that A hold, M must be a linear manifold. B is valid of itself. We
postpone C momentarily; in any case a C(n) or a C(∞) holds. D means: if a
sequence in M satisﬁes the Cauchy convergence criterion, then it has a limit in
M. Since such a sequence will certainly possess a limit in R, D means simply that
this limit also belongs to M. That is, M must be closed. The condition E always
holds, as we saw in thee proof of theorem 9. Therefore, we may summarize
thus: M must be a closed linear manifold. We call the orthonormal linear set
which spans M (theorem 9) φ1, φ2, . . . . If it is inﬁnite, then C(∞) obviously


3. Digression on the Conditions A–E
holds, and M is isomorphic to R∞, therefore to R itself; if it terminates at φn
then C(n) holds (e.g., because of theorem 3(n)); i.e., M is isomorphic to Rn.
But since D, E are valid in M in any case, they are valid in each Rn.
Therefore they also follow from A–C(n).
As we see, we have avoided the direct veriﬁcation of A–E (with C(n) or
C(∞)) in Rn or R∞. This was achieved by indirect, logical devices. However,
a direct, analytical demonstration causes no essential diﬃculties either. It may
be left to the reader for proof.
It still remains to show that D and E are independent of A–C(∞). As we
have seen previously, every linear manifold in R∞satisﬁes A,B,E as well as C(n)
or C(∞), but if it is not closed then D is not fulﬁlled. In this case C(∞) must
hold in it, because D follows from C(n). Now it is not diﬃcult to exhibit such a
non-closed linear manifold. Let φ1, φ2, . . . be an orthonormal set. Then the
N
ν=1
xνφν
:
N = 1, 2, . . . ; x1, . . . , xN arbitrary
form a linear manifold, but one which is not closed, because
∞
ν=1
ν φν
(:∞
ν=1( 1
ν )2 is inﬁnite!) is a limiting point, but not an element of the manifold.
;
N
ν=1
ν φν −→
∞
ν=1
ν φν
as
N −→∞
<
Consequently, D is independent of A–C(∞), E.
Let us consider next all complex functions x(α) whose parameter α is
continuous: −∞< α < +∞. Moreover, suppose that it is possible to write
x(α) ̸= 0 in a series, such that the sum :
α |x(α)|2 extended over these terms is
ﬁnite.55 All these functions x(α) form a space Rcont. Since for any two points
x(α), y(α) of the latter space, x(α) or y(α) ̸= 0 only for two α-sequences, and
since we can join these two sequences into a single one, x(α) = y(α) = 0 except
for a certain α-sequence α1, α2, . . . . Therefore we need discuss only the values
xn = x(αn), yn = y(αn) for all n = 1, 2, . . . . These all behave the same as in
R∞, as long as only two Rcont points appear. Hence A, B hold in Rcont exactly
as in R∞.56 The same follows for k (= 1, 2, . . .) Rcont points, therefore C(∞)
holds also. Moreover, this is even true for a sequence of Rcont points. Consider
55 Although α varies continuously, this is a sum and not an integral, since
only a sequence of the α appears in the sum!
56 We naturally deﬁne
&
x(α), y(α)
'
as :
α x(α)y(α).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
x1(α), x2(α), . . . ; the α with xn(α) ̸= 0 for a sequence for each n = 1, 2, . . . :
α(1)
1 , α(1)
2 , α(2)
1 , α(2)
2 , α(3)
1 , . . . . Consequently, D holds in Rcont as well as in R∞.
It is otherwise with E. In that case, all points of R play a role (all must be limit
points of an appropriate sequence), therefore we must reason from R∞to Rcont.
Also, the condition is actually not satisﬁed, because one deduction from it is
invalid: there exists an orthonormal set which cannot be written as a sequence
(contrary to theorem 3(∞)).
Let
xβ(α) =
.
for
α = β
for
α ̸= β
for each β; xβ(α) is an element of Rcont, and the xβ(α) form an orthonormal
set. But they could be written as a sequence only if it were possible for all β:
−∞< β < +∞, which is well known not to be the case.57 Therefore, E is also
independent of A–C(∞), D.
(In addition, the fundamental diﬀerence between the function space of the
f(x) with ﬁnite
! +∞
−∞
|f(x)|2 dx
and that of the x(α) with ﬁnite :
α |x(α)|2 should be noted. We could just as
well characterize the former as the space of all x(α) with ﬁnite
! +∞
−∞
|x(α)|2 dα !
The entire diﬀerence is the replacing of
( +∞
−∞. . . dα by :
α . . . , and yet the ﬁrst
named space is FΩ, therefore satisﬁes A–E and is isomorphic to R∞, while the
latter, Rcont, violates E and is essentially diﬀerent from R∞. Nevertheless the
two spaces are identical except for their diﬀering deﬁnitions of magnitude!)
4. CLOSED LINEAR MANIFOLDS
The § II.2 is of importance for us not only because of the proof of
isomorphism, butalso because several theorems on orthonormal sets were proved
therein. We now desire to go further into the geometric analysis of Hilbert
space, and to investigate in detail the closed linear manifolds which play in R∞
a role analogous to that played by straight lines, planes, etc. in Rn (i.e., the
Rm, m ⩽n).
We ﬁrst recall the definitions 2 & 5: if A is any set in R, then {A} or [A]
is the linear manifold spanned by A or the closed linear manifold respectively;
i.e., smallest representant of either type which contains A.
57 This is the set theoretical theorem on the “Non-denumerability of the
Continuum.” See, for example, the book of Hausdorﬀmentioned in Note 45.


4. Closed Linear Manifolds
Now we extend this notation so that by
{A, B, . . . , f, g, . . .}
or
[A, B, . . . , f, g, . . .]
(if A, B, . . . are any subsets and f, g, . . . any elements of R) we understand
respectively the linear manifold or the closed linear manifold spanned by that
set which results from the combination of the A, B, . . . and the f, g, . . . .
If, in particular, M, N, . . . (ﬁnite or inﬁnite in number) are closed linear
manifolds,
then we designate the closed linear manifold [M, N, . . .] by
M+N+· · ·. The linear manifold {M, N, . . .} clearly consists of all sums f+g+· · ·
(f running through M, g running through N, . . . ), while [M, N, . . .] = M+N+· · ·
is obtained from this by the addition of the limit points. If only a ﬁnite number
of sets M, N are present, and each element of one is orthogonal to all elements
of the others, then, as we shall soon see, these two representations are equal to
each other, which is not necessarily the case in general.
If M is a subset of N, then we consider the totality of elements of N which
are orthogonal to all elements of M. This also is obviously a closed linear
manifold, which may be called N −M. theorem 14 will clarify the reason
for denoting this as subtraction. The set N −M of all f orthogonal to the
entire M is of special importance.
This is called the closed linear manifold
complementary to M.
Finally, we select three particularly simple closed linear manifolds: ﬁrst,
R itself; second, the set {0} = [0] consisting of zero alone; and third, the set
of all af (f a given element of R, a variable), which is clearly a closed linear
manifold, and therefore simultaneously = {f} = [f ].
We now introduce the concept of “projection,” one which is completely
analogous to that term in Euclidean geometry:
theorem 10. Let M be a closed linear manifold. Then each f can
be resolved in one and only one way into two components, f = g+h,
g from M, h from R −M.
note. We call g the projection of f in M, h (which is orthogonal
to all M) the normal from f onto M. We introduce the notation
PMf for g.
proof: Let φ1, φ2, . . . be the orthonormal set, existing by reason of theorem 9,
spanning the closed manifold M. We write g = :
n(f, φn)·φn. By theorem 6,
this series converges (even when inﬁnite), its sum g obviously belonging to M.
Furthermore, by theorem 6, h = f −g is orthogonal to all φ1, φ2, . . . . But
since the vectors orthogonal to h form a closed linear manifold, along with
φ1, φ2, . . . all M is also orthogonal to h; i.e., h belongs to R −M.
If there were still another resolution f = g ′ + h′, g ′ from M, h′ from
R −M, then g + h = g ′ + h′, g −g ′ = h −h′ = j. The j would have to belong
simultaneously to M and R −M, and would therefore be orthogonal to itself.
Therefore (j, j) = 0, j = 0 and consequently g = g ′, h = h′.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
The operation PMf is therefore one which assigns to each f of R its
projection in M, PMf. In the next section we shall deﬁne: an operator R is
a function deﬁned in a subset of R with values from R; i.e., a correspondence
which assigns to certain f of R certain Rf of R. (Not necessarily for all f. For
other f of R the operation may be undeﬁned; i.e., “meaningless.”) PM is then
an operator deﬁned everywhere in R and is known as the projection operator of
M, or merely the projection of M.
theorem 11. The operator PM has the following properties:
PM(a1f1 + · · · + anfn) = a1PMf1 + · · · + anPMfn
(PMf, g) = (f, PMg)
PM(PMf) = PMf
M is the set of all values of PM; i.e., the set of all PMf. But it can
also be characterized as the set of all solutions of PMf = f, while
R −M is the set of all solutions of PMf = 0.
note. In the succeeding sections we shall see that the ﬁrst property
determines the so-called linear operators, and the second the
so-called Hermitian operators. The third expresses the following:
double application of PM has the same eﬀect as single application.
The customary symbolic representation of this is
PMPM = PM
or
P2
M = PM
proof: From f1 = g1 + h1, . . . , fn = gn + hn
=
g1, . . . , gn
from
M
h1, . . . , hn
from
R −M
>
it follows that
a1f1 + . . . + anfn = (a1g1 + . . . + angn) + (a1h1 + . . . + anhn)
=
a1g1 + . . . + angn
from
M
a1h1 + . . . + anhn
from
R −M
>
Therefore
PM(a1f1 + . . . + anfn) = a1g1 + . . . + angn
= a1PMf1 + · · · + anPMfn
This is the ﬁrst assertion.


4. Closed Linear Manifolds
In the second case, let
f = g ′ + h′, g = g ′′ + h′′
:
.
g ′, g ′′
from
R
h′, h′′
from
R −M
Then g ′, g ′′ are orthogonal to h′, h′′. Therefore
(g ′, g) = (g ′, g ′′ + h′′) = (g ′, g ′′) = (g ′ + h′, g ′′) = (f, g ′′)
i.e., (PMf, g) = (f, PMg). This is the second assertion.
Finally, PMf belongs to M, therefore PMf = PMf + 0 is the resolution into
components guaranteed by theorem 10 for PMf; i.e., PM(PMf) = PMf. This
is the third assertion.
The relations PMf = f or 0 signify that in the resolution f = g +h (g from
M, h from R−M: theorem 10) either f −g, h = 0 or g = 0, f = h; i.e., that f
belongs either to M or to R −M. These are the ﬁfth and sixth assertions.
All PMf belong to M by deﬁnition, and each f ′ of M is equal to a PMf:
e.g., according to the statements just made, to PMf. This is the fourth assertion.
We observe next that the second and third assertions imply this:
(PMf, PMg) = (f, PMPMg) = (f, PMg) = (PMf, g)
We now want to characterize the projection operators independently of
the M.
theorem 12. An operator E, deﬁned everywhere (seethe discussion
preceding theorem 11) is a projection; i.e., E = PM for a closed
linear manifold M, if and only if it has the following properties:
(Ef, g) = (f, Eg),
E2 = E
(see the note on theorem 11).
In this case, M is uniquely
determined by E (according to theorem 11).
proof: The necessity of this condition as well as the determination of M by E
is obvious from theorem 11. We then have only to show that if E possesses
the above properties, then there is a closed linear manifold M with E = PM.
Let M be the closed manifold spanned by all Ef. Then g−Eg is orthogonal
to all Ef:
(Ef, g −Eg) = (Ef, g) −(Ef, Eg) = (Ef, g) −(E2f, g) = 0
The elements orthogonal to g −Eg of R form a closed linear manifold; therefore
they include M along with Ef, so g −Eg belongs to R−M. The resolution of g
for M, in the sense of theorem 10, is then g = Eg+(g−Eg), hence PMg = Eg,
where g is arbitrary. Therefore the entire theorem is proved.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
If M = R or [0] then R −M = [0] or R respectively, therefore f = f + 0
or 0 + f is the resolution, by theorem 11; hence PMf = f or 0 respectively.
We call I the operator deﬁned (everywhere!) by Rf = f, and O the operator
deﬁned by Rf = 0. Hence PR = I , P[0] = O. Furthermore, it is clear that
the resolution f = g + h (g from M, h from R −M) belonging to M is also
useful for R−M in the form f = h+g (h from R−M, g from M). (For, since g
belongs to M, it is orthogonal to each element of R−M and therefore belongs to
R−(R−M)). Therefore PMf = g, PR−Mf = h = f −g; i.e., PR−Mf = f −PMf.
This fact, PR−Mf = If −PMf, we express symbolically as PR−M = I −PM (for
the addition, subtraction and multiplication of operators, see the discussion in
theorem 14).
The following should be noted: A short time ago we easily recognized that
M is a subset of R −(R −M). It is diﬃcult to prove directly that both sets are
equal. But this equality follows immediately from
PR−(R−M) = I −PR−M = I −(I −PM) = PM
Moreover, it follows from the above that if E is a projection, I −E is also a
projection, and because I −(I −E) = E the converse is also true.
theorem 13. It is always true that
∥Ef∥2 = (Ef, f),
∥Ef∥⩽∥f∥
∥Ef∥= 0 or = ∥f∥is characteristic for the f of R −M and M
respectively.
note. In particular, therefore,
∥Ef −Eg∥= ∥E(f −g)∥⩽∥f −g∥
i.e.,the operator E is continuous(see the discussion after theorem2
in II.1).
proof: We have (see the discussion after theorem 11)
∥Ef∥2 = (Ef, Ef) = (Ef, f)
Since I −E is also a projection,
∥Ef∥2 + ∥f −Ef∥2 = ∥Ef∥2 + ∥(I −E)f∥2
= (Ef, f) + ((I −E)f, f)
= (f, f) = ∥f∥2
Since both components are ⩾
0, they are also ⩽
∥f∥2;
in particular
∥Ef∥2 ⩽∥f∥2, ∥Ef∥⩽∥f∥. That ∥Ef∥= 0, Ef = 0 expresses the fact that f
belongs to R −M we know from theorem 11. Because of the above relation,
∥Ef∥= ∥f∥means that ∥f −Ef∥= 0, Ef = f and therefore, by theorem 11,
that f belongs to M.


4. Closed Linear Manifolds
If R and S are two operators, then we understand by R± S, aR (a a complex
number) and RS the operators deﬁned by
(R ± S)f = Rf ± Sf,
(aR)f = a(Rf),
(RS)f = R(Sf)
and we use the then natural notation
R0 = I,
R1 = R,
R2 = RR,
R3 = RRR,
. . .
The rules of calculation which are valid here can be discussed rather easily. For
R ± S, aR we can verify without diﬃculty all elementary laws of calculation
valid for numbers, but such is not the case for RS. The distributive law holds,
as can easily be veriﬁed: (R ± S)T = RT ± ST and R(S ± T) = RS ± RT (for
the latter the linearity of R is of course necessary; see the note on theorem 11
and the discussion in the following paragraph). The associative law also holds:
(RS)T = R(ST) = RST, but the commutative law RS = SR is not generally
valid. [(RS)f = R(Sf) and (SR)f = S(Rf) need not equal each other!] If this
law does hold for two particular R, S they are said to commute. Hence, for
example, O and I commute with all R which are deﬁned everywhere:
RO = OR = O,
RI = IR = R
Also, Rm and Rn commute, since RmRn = Rm+n, and therefore does not depend
upon the order of m, n.
theorem 14. Let E, F project onto closed linear manifolds M and
N. Then EF is also a projection if and only if E, F commute; i.e., if
and only if EF = FE. Also, EF belongs to the closed linear manifold
P which consists of the elements common to M and N. The operator
E + F is a projection if and only if EF = O (or equally: FE = O).
This means that all M is orthogonal to all N; E + F then belongs to
M + N = [M, N ], which in this case = {M, N}. The operator E −F
is a projection if and only if EF = F (or equally: if FE = F). This
means that N is a subset of M, and E −F belongs to M −N.
proof: For EF we must re-examine the two conditions of theorem 12:
(EFf, g) = (f, EFg),
(EF)2 = EF
Because (EFf, g) = (Ff, Eg) = (f, FEg), the ﬁrst signiﬁes that
(f, EFg) = (f, FEg),
(f, (EF −FE)g) = 0
Since this holds for all f, (EF −FE)g = 0, and since this holds for all g,
EF−FE = O, EF = FE. Commutativity is therefore necessary and suﬃcient for
the ﬁrst condition, but it also has the second one as a consequence:
(EF)2 = EFEF = EEFF = E2F2 = EF


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Since E + F always satisﬁes the ﬁrst condition ((E + F)f, g) = (f, (E + F)g)
(because E, F do so) only the second condition (E + F)2 = E + F remains to be
proved. Since
(E + F)2 = E2 + F2 + EF + FE = (E + F) + (EF + FE)
this means simply that EF + FE = O. Now for EF = O, EF is a projection.
Therefore, by the above proof, EF = FE, therefore EF + FE = O. Conversely,
from EF + FE = O it follows that
E(EF + FE) = E2F + EFE = EF + EFE = O
therefore EFE = O, and therefore EF = O. Consequently, EF = O is necessary
and suﬃcient, and, since E and F play identical roles, FE = O too is necessary
and suﬃcient.
E −F is a projection if and only if I −(E −F) = (I −E) + F is one, and since
I−E, F are projections, by the same argument, (I−E)F = O, F−EF = O, EF = F
are characteristic of this, or equally, F(I −E) = O, F −FE = O, FE = F.
We have yet to prove the propositions on M, N (E = PM, F = PN). First,
let EF = FE. Then each EFf = FEf belongs to both M and N, and therefore
to P. And, for each g of P, Eg = Fg = g, therefore EFg = Fg = g; i.e., it has
the form EFf. Consequently, P is the totality of the values of EF, hence, by
theorem 11, EF = PP. Second, let EF = O (therefore also FE = O). Each
(E + F)f = Ef + Ff belongs to {M, N}, and each g of {M, N} is equal to h + j
(h from M, j from N). Therefore Eh = h, Fh = FEf = 0, Fj = j, Ej = EFj = 0.
Therefore
(E + F)(h + j) = Eh + Fh + Ej + Fj = h + j,
(E + F)g = g
Then g has the form (E + F)f. Consequently {M, N} is the totality of values of
E+F, but since E+F is a projection, {M, N} is the corresponding closed linear
manifold (theorem 11). Since {M, N} is closed, it = [M, N] = M + N. Third,
let EF = F (therefore FE = F also). Then E = PM, I −F = PR−N, therefore
E −F = E −EF = E(I −F), equaling PP, where P is the intersection of M and
R −N; i.e., M −N.
Finally, EF = O means that (EFf, g) = 0 always; i.e., (Ff, Eg) = 0; i.e.,
that the entire M is orthogonal to the entire N. And EF = F means F(I−E) = O;
i.e., all N is orthogonal to R−M, or equally: N is a subset of R−(R−M) = M.
If N is a subset of M, then we want also to say for F = PN, E = PM that
F is a part of E: symbolically, E ⩾F or F ⩽E. (This then means that EF = F
or also FE = F, and has commutativity as a consequence. This can be seen by
observation of M, N or by direct calculation. It is always true that O ⩽E ⩽I.
From E ⩽F, F ⩽E it follows that E = F. From E ⩽F, F ⩽G it follows that
E ⩽G. This possesses the characteristics of an ordering according to magnitude.
It should further be observed that E ⩽F, I−E ⩾I−F and E orthogonal to I−F
are all equivalent. Furthermore, the orthogonality of E′, F′ follows from that
of E, F if E′ ⩽E, F′ ⩽F.) If M, N are orthogonal we say that E, F are also
orthogonal. (Hence this means that EF = O or FE = O.) Conversely, if E, F
commute we say that M,N also commute.


4. Closed Linear Manifolds
theorem 15. The statement E ⩽F is equivalent to the general
validity of ∥Ef∥⩽∥Ff∥.
proof: From E ⩽F it follows that E = EF, therefore ∥Ef∥= ∥EFf∥⩽∥Ff∥
(see theorem 13). Conversely, this theorem has the following consequence:
If Ff = 0 then ∥Ef∥⩽∥Ff∥= 0, Ef = 0. Now,because of F(I−F)f = (F−F2)f = 0
we have E(I−F)f = 0 identically; i.e., E(I−F) = E−EF = O, E = EF, therefore
E ⩽F.
theorem 16. Let E1, . . . , Ek be projections. Then E1 + · · · + Ek is
a projection if and only if all Em, Eℓ(m, ℓ= 1, . . . , k; m ̸= ℓ) are
mutually orthogonal. Another necessary and suﬃcient condition is
∥E1f∥2 + · · · + ∥Ekf∥2 ⩽∥f∥2
for all f
Moreover, E1 + · · · + Ek, (E1 = PM1, . . . , Ek = PMk) is then the
projection of M1 + · · · + Mk = [M1, . . . , Mk], which in this case
= {M1, . . . , Mk}.
proof: The last proposition obtains by repeated application of theorem 14.
And so does the suﬃciency of the ﬁrst criterion.
If the second criterion is
satisﬁed, then the ﬁrst one is too. For m ̸= ℓ, Emf = f
∥E1f∥2 + · · · + ∥Ekf∥2 = ∥f∥2 +
ℓ̸=m
∥Eℓf∥2 ⩽∥f∥2
∥Eℓf∥2 = 0,
Eℓf = 0
:
ℓ̸= m
But since Em(Emf) = Emf holds identically, Eℓ(Emf) = 0; i.e., EℓEm = O.
Finally, the second condition is necessary: If E1 + · · · + Ek is a projection, then
(theorem 13)
∥E1f∥2 + · · · + ∥Ekf∥2 = (E1f, f) + · · · + (Ekf, f)
= ((E1 + · · · + Ek)f, f)
= ∥(E1 + · · · + Ek)f∥2 ⩽∥f∥2
We have therefore the following logical scheme: E1 + · · · + Ek is a projection
⇒second criterion ⇒ﬁrst criterion ⇒E1 + · · · + Ek is a projection. Therefore
all three are equivalent.
In conclusion, we prove a theorem on the convergence of the projections:
theorem 17. Let E1, E2, . . . be an increasing or decreasing sequence
of projections: E1 ⩽E2 ⩽· · · or E1 ⩾E2 ⩾· · · . These converge
to a projection E in the sense that for all f, Enf −→Ef; also, all
En ⩽E or En ⩾E, respectively.
proof: It suﬃces to investigate the second case, since the ﬁrst can be reduced
to it by the substitutions I −E1, I −E2, . . . , I −E for E1, E2, . . . , E. Let therefore
E1 ⩾E2 ⩾· · · .
By theorem 13, ∥E1f∥2 ⩾∥E2f∥2 ⩾· · · ⩾0 therefore


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
limm→∞∥Emf∥2 exists. Then for each ϵ > 0 there exists an N = N(ϵ) such
that for m, ℓ⩾N
∥Emf∥2 −∥Eℓf∥2 < ϵ
Now for m ⩽ℓ, Em ⩾Eℓthe operator Em −Eℓis a projection, therefore
∥Emf∥2 −∥Eℓf∥2 = (Emf, f) −(Eℓf, f)
= ((Em −Eℓ)f, f) = ∥(Em −Eℓ)f∥2
= ∥Emf −Eℓf∥2
from which it follows that ∥Emf −Eℓf∥< √ϵ.
The sequence E1f, E2f, . . .
therefore satisﬁes the Cauchy convergence criterion and has a limit f ∗(see D
from II.2!).
Ef = f ∗therefore deﬁnes an operation which has meaning
everywhere.
From (Enf, g) = (f, En g) it follows by transition to the limit that
(Ef, g) = (f, Eg)
and from (Enf, Eng) = (Enf, g) that (Ef, Eg) = (Ef, g). Therefore
(E2f, g) = (Ef, g)
:
E2 = E
Consequently E is a projection. For ℓ⩾m, ∥Emf∥⩾∥Eℓf∥and as ℓ→∞we
obtain ∥Emf∥⩾∥Ef∥. Therefore Em ⩾E (theorem 15).
If E1, E2, . . . are projections, each pair of which are mutually orthogonal,
then
E1,
E1 + E2,
E1 + E2 + E3,
. . .
are also projections, and form an increasing sequence. By theorem 17 they
converge to a projection which is ⩾all of them, and which we can denote by
E = E1 + E2 + · · · . Let E1 = PM1, E2 = PM2, . . . , E = PM. Since all Em ⩽E,
Mm is a subset of M, therefore M also includes
[M1, M2, . . .] = M1 + M2 + · · · = M′
Conversely,
all
Mm
are
subsets
of
M′;
therefore
Em ⩽PM′ = E′.
Consequently, by reasons of continuity (see the treatment in the proof above),
E ⩽E′. Therefore M is a subset of M′, and hence M = M′, E = E′; i.e.,
M = M1 + M2 + · · · or, written another way,
PM1+M2+ ··· = PM1 + PM2 + · · ·
With this we conclude our study of projection operators.


5. Operators in Hilbert Space
5. OPERATORS IN HILBERT SPACE
We have now given suﬃcient consideration to the geometric relations of
the (Hilbert) space R∞of inﬁnitely many dimensions that we may turn our
attention to its linear operators; i.e., to the linear mappings of R∞on itself.
For this purpose, we must introduce several concepts which were actually
anticipated, to a certain extent, in the last few sections.
In these sections, we concerned ourselves with operators, which we deﬁne
as follows (in accord with the statements made preceding theorem 11):
definition 6.
An operator R is a function deﬁned in a subset
of R with values from R; that is, a relation which establishes a
correspondence between certain elements f of R and elements Rf
of R.
(We have admitted the Rn here in addition to R∞. It should be observed
that if R∞is an FΩthen the operator R is deﬁned for the elements of FΩ;
i.e., ordinary conﬁguration space functions, and its values are deﬁned likewise.
The operators are then so-called “function-functions” or “functionals.” See the
examples of I.2 &4.) The class of the f for which Rf is deﬁned—the domain of R
—need not encompass the entire R, but if it does so, R is said to be deﬁned
everywhere. In addition, it is not necessary that the set of all the Rf—the range
of R (the mapping of its domain mediated by R)—be contained in the domain
of R; i.e., if Rf has meaning, it does not necessarily follow that R(Rf) = R2f
is deﬁned.58
We have already given the meaning of R ± S, aR, RS, Rm (R, S operators,
a a complex number, m = 0, 1, 2, . . .) in the preceding section:
(R ± S)f = Rf ± Sf,
(aR)f = a · Rf,
(RS)f = R(Sf)
R0 = I,
R1 = R,
R2 = RR,
R3 = RRR,
. . .
In determining the domains of these operators, it should be observed that
58 For example, let R∞be an FΩ, where Ωis the space of all real x,
−∞< x < +∞.
d
dx is a functional; i.e., an operator, but deﬁned in our
sense only for such f(x) as, in the ﬁrst place, are diﬀerentiable and which, in
the second place, have ﬁnite
! +∞
−∞
| d
dxf(x)|2 dx
(see II.8 where this is discussed in more detail). Naturally, in general, d2
dx2 f(x)
will not exist, and
! +∞
−∞
| d2
dx2 f(x)|2 dx
is not necessarily ﬁnite. For example, f(x) = |x|
2 e−x2 behaves in this manner.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
the left sides (i.e., the operators R ± S, aR, RS) are deﬁned only if the right
sides are also deﬁned. Therefore, for example, R ± S is deﬁned only in the
common parts of the domains of R and S, etc. If Rf takes on each of its values
only once, then it has an inverse R –1: R –1 is deﬁned if Rf = g has a solution g,
and its value is then this g. The discussion in the preceding sections was on the
laws of calculation valid for R ± S, aR, RS; here we will only add the following
with regard to their domains. The operators there designated as equal also have
identical domains, while operator equations such as O · R = O do not hold for
the domains. Of always has meaning, while (O · R)f, by deﬁnition, only has
meaning if Rf is deﬁned (but if both are deﬁned, then both = 0). On the other
hand, I · R = R · I = R hold, and also Rm · Rℓ= Rm+ℓ, and the same is true for
their domains.
If R, S have inverses, then RS also possesses an inverse, which is, as can
easily be seen, (RS) –1 = S –1R –1. Furthermore, for a ̸= 0, (aR) –1 = 1aR –1. If R –1
exists we can also form the other negative powers of R:
R−2 = R
–1R
–1,
R−3 = R
–1R
–1R
–1,
. . .
After this general development, we proceed to the investigation in more
detail of those special classes of operators which will be of particular importance
to us.
definition 7. An operator A is said to be linear if its domain is
a linear manifold; i.e., if it contains a1f1 + · · · + akfk along with
f1, . . . , fk, and if
A(a1f1 + · · · + akfk) = a1Af1 + · · · + akAfk
In the following we shall consider only linear operators, and indeed,
only those whose domains are everywhere dense.
The latter remark provides a suﬃcient substitute, for many purposes, for
the requirement that operators be deﬁned everywhere, which we must abandon
in quantum mechanics. This circumstance is suﬃciently important for us to
consider it in more detail. For example, let us consider the conﬁguration space
in Schr¨odinger’s wave mechanics which, for simplicity, we shall take as one
dimensional: −∞< q < +∞. The wave functions are φ(x) with ﬁnite
! +∞
−∞
|φ(q)|2dq
These form a Hilbert space (see II.3). We also consider the operators q· and
ℏ
i
d
dq· . They are evidently linear operators, but their domain is not the entire
Hilbert space. This is not so for q· because
! +∞
−∞
|q · φ(q)|2dq =
! +∞
−∞
q2|φ(q)|2dq


5. Operators in Hilbert Space
can very well become inﬁnite, even if
" +∞
−∞|φ(q)|2dq is ﬁnite, so that q · φ(q)
no longer lies in the Hilbert space. And it is not so for ℏ
i
d
dq· because there are
non-diﬀerentiable functions for which, even though
" +∞
−∞|φ(q)|2dq is ﬁnite,
! +∞
−∞
| ℏ
i
d
dq · φ(q)|2dq = ℏ2
! +∞
−∞
| d
dqφ(q)|2dq
is not ﬁnite (for example: |q|
2 e−q2 or e−q2 sin(aq2)).
But the domains are
everywhere dense. Both operators are certainly applicable to functions φ(q)
which vanish except on a ﬁnite interval −c < q < +c and which are everywhere
continuously diﬀerentiable; this set of functions is everywhere dense.59
We further deﬁne
definition 8. Two operators A and A∗are said to be adjoint if
they have the same domain, and in this domain
(Af, g) = (f, A∗g),
(A∗f, g) = (f, Ag)
By exchanging f, g and taking the complex conjugate of both sides, each of
these relations follows from the other. Furthermore, it is clear that the relation
A, A∗is symmetric; i.e., that A∗, A are also adjoint, so that A∗∗= A.
We note further that for A only one adjoint A∗can be given; i.e., if A is
adjoint to A∗
1 and to A∗
2, then A∗
1 = A∗
2. In fact, for all g with Ag deﬁned,
(A∗
1f, g) = (f, Ag) = (A∗
2f, g)
and since there g are everywhere dense, A∗
1f = A∗
2f. Since this holds in general,
A∗
1 = A∗
2. Consequently, A determines A∗uniquely, just as A∗does A.
59 According to the development of II.3 (in the discussion of the condition E),
it is suﬃcient if we can approximate all linear combinations of the following
function arbitrarily well: f(x) = 1 in a set consisting of a ﬁnite number of
intervals, and = 0 elsewhere. This is possible if we can approximate each one of
these functions separately, and this in turn is possible if the same can be done
for functions with a single unit-interval (the other functions are sums of such).
For example, let the interval be a < x < b. The function
f(x) =





for x < a −ϵ or x > b + ϵ
cos2 ' π
a−x
ϵ
(
for a −ϵ ⩽x ⩽a
cos2 ' π
x−b
ϵ
(
for b ⩽x ⩽b + ϵ
for a < x < b
actually satisﬁes our requirements of regularity and approximates the given
function arbitrarily well for suﬃciently small ϵ.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
The following can be seen immediately: O, I and, in general, all projections
E are self-adjoint (see theorem 12); i.e., O∗, I∗and E∗are respectively equal
to O, I and E.
Furthermore, (aA)∗= aA∗and, so far as A + B can be
formed in general (i.e., their domain is everywhere dense), (A ± B)∗= A∗± B∗.
Finally, with limitations on the domain which can easily be ascertained,
(AB)∗= B∗A∗(because (ABf, g) = (Bf, A∗g) = (f, A∗B∗g)) and (A
–1)
∗= (A∗)–1
by (A
–1f, g) = (A
–1f, A∗A∗–1g) = (AA
–1f, A∗–1g) = (f, A∗–1g).
In particular, for the case of the Schr¨odinger wave mechanics (which we
considered previously, but here a k-dimensional conﬁguration space will be
assumed), where the Hilbert space consists of the φ(q1, . . . , qk) with ﬁnite
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
we have for the operators qℓ· and ℏ
i
∂
∂qℓ·
(qℓ·)∗= qℓ·,
)ℏ
i
∂
∂qℓ
·
*∗
= ℏ
i
∂
∂qℓ
·
The former is clear since
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
qℓ· φ(q1, . . . , qk) · ψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqk
=
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
φ(q1, . . . , qk) · qℓ· ψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqk
The latter implies that
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
ℏ
i
∂
∂qℓφ(q1, . . . , qk) · ψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqk
=
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
φ(q1, . . . , qk) · ℏ
i
∂
∂qℓψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqk
i.e.,
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
+ ∂
∂qℓ
φ(q1, . . . , qk) · ψ(q1, . . . , qk)
+ φ(q1, . . . , qk) · ∂
∂qk
ψ(q1, . . . , qk)
,
dq1 . . . dqk = 0
lim
A,B→+∞
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
-
φ(q1, . . . , qk)ψ(q1, . . . , qk)
.qℓ=+A
qℓ=−B
dq1 . . . dqℓ−1dqℓ+1 . . . dqk = 0
The limit must exist because the convergence of all integrals
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
· · · dq1 . . . dqk
is certain (since φ, ψ, ∂φ/∂qℓ, ∂ψ/∂qℓbelong to the Hilbert space), so that it


5. Operators in Hilbert Space
is only its vanishing which is of importance. If it were ̸= 0 then the limit (which
certainly exists) would be ̸= 0 for qℓ→+∞or for qℓ→−∞:
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
φ(q1, . . . , qk)ψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqℓ−1dqℓ+1 . . . dqk
which is incompatible with the absolute convergence of the integral
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
φ(q1, . . . , qk)ψ(q1, . . . , qk)dq1 . . . dqℓ−1dqℓdqℓ+1 . . . dqk
(φ, ψ belong to the Hilbert space!).
If A is the integral operator
Aφ(qq, . . . , qk) =
!
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
K(q1, . . . , qk; q ′
1, . . . , q ′
k)dq ′
1 . . . , dq ′
k
then the following is obtained directly: A∗is also an integral operator, only its
kernel is not
K(q1, . . . , qk; q ′
1, . . . , q ′
k)
but
K(q ′
1, . . . , q ′
k; q1, . . . , qk)
Let us now consider the situation in matrix theory, where the Hilbert space
consists of all sequences x1, x2, . . . with ﬁnite /∞
µ=1 |xµ|2. A linear operator A
transforms {x1, x2, . . .} into {y1, y2, . . .}
A{x1, x2, . . .} = {y1, y2, . . .}
where, because of the linearity of A, the y1, y2, . . . must depend linearly on the
x1, x2, . . . : 60
yµ =
∞
ν=1
aµνxν
Therefore A is characterized by the matrix {aµν}. We see immediately that the
60 The following consideration is not rigorous, since it uses linearity in the
case of inﬁnite sums, etc. But it can be perfected as follows: Let φ1, φ2, . . . be
a complete orthonormal set, and let A, A∗be adjoint operators. Let
f =
∞
ν=1
xνφν,
Af =
∞
ν=1
yνφν
Then
yµ = (Af, φµ) = (f, A∗φµ) =
∞
ν=1
(f, φν)(A∗φµ, φν)
by theorem 7γ
=
∞
ν=1
xν(φµ, Aφν) =
∞
ν=1
(Aφν, φµ)xν


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
matrix {aνµ} belongs to A∗.60
The analogy with the situation in matrix theory which has just been
developed suggests introducing the concept of Hermitian operator, in a manner
which we shall not expound. Simultaneously we shall introduce also two other
concepts which will be important for our later purposes.
definition 9. The operator A is said to be Hermitian if A∗= A.
It is also said to be deﬁnite if it is always true that (Af, f) ⩾0.61
The operator U is said to be unitary if UU∗= U∗U = I.62
For unitary operators we thus have U∗= U –1. By deﬁnition,
(Uf, Ug) = (U∗Uf, g) = (f, g)
so, in particular (for f = g), ∥Uf∥= ∥f∥. Conversely, unitarity follows from
the latter properties if U is deﬁned everywhere and takes on every value (see
Note 62). We prove this as follows: Assume it to be true that ∥Uf∥= ∥f∥;
If we set aµν = (Aφν, φµ) we have the formula
yµ =
∞
ν=1
aµνxν
of the text, and absolute convergence is assured. In the Hilbert space of the
sequences x1, x2, . . . the sequences
φ1 = 1, 0, 0, . . .
φ2 = 0, 1, 0, . . .
etc.
form a complete orthonormal set (as can easily be seen). For
f = {x1, x2, . . .},
f =
∞
ν=1
xνφν
Af = {y1, y2, . . .},
Af =
∞
ν=1
yνφν
In this way complete concordance with the text is reached. If we form a∗
µν for
A∗then we see that
a∗
µν = (A∗φν, φµ) = (φν, Aφµ) = aνµ
61 (Af, f) is real in any case, since it equals
(A∗f, f) = (f, Af) = (Af, f)
62 Consequently, U, U∗must be deﬁned everywhere. Furthermore, they are
inverse to each other. Therefore they each take on every value once and only
once.


5. Operators in Hilbert Space
i.e., that (Uf, Uf) = (f, f), (U∗Uf, f) = (f, f). If we replace f by 1
2(f + g) and
again by 1
2(f −g) and subtract, then we obtain, as may easily be calculated,
Re(Uf, Ug) = Re(f, g). If we substitute i·f here for f then we get Im in place
of Re. Consequently it is true in general that
(Uf, Ug) = (f, g),
(U∗Uf, g) = (f, g)
For ﬁxed f this holds for all g. Therefore U∗Uf = f. Since this holds for all
f, we have U∗U = I. We still must show that UU∗= I. For each f there is a g
with Ug = f, so UU∗f = UU∗· Ug = U · U∗Ug = Ug = f. Therefore UU∗= I.
Since, because of linearity,
∥Uf −Ug∥= ∥U(f −g)∥= ∥f −g∥
each unitary operator is continuous, which is not at all necessary for Hermitian
operators. For example, the operators q· and ℏ
i
∂
∂q· so important for quantum
mechanics are discontinuous.63
From our formal rules of calculation for A∗it follows immediately that
if U, V are unitary, U –1 and UV are also. Therefore, all powers of U are also
unitary. If A, B are Hermitian then A ± B are also Hermitian. On the other
hand, aA is Hermitian only for real a (if A ̸= O), while AB is Hermitian only
if A, B commute; i.e., AB = BA. Furthermore, we know that all projectors (in
particular O, I) are Hermitian, as also are the operators qℓ· and ℏ
i
∂
∂qℓ· of the
Schr¨odinger theory. All powers of A are Hermitian (also A
–1 if it exists), and all
polynomials with real coeﬃcients. It is noteworthy that for Hermitian A and
arbitrary X, XAX∗is also Hermitian:
(XAX∗)∗= X∗∗A∗X∗= XAX∗
Therefore, for example, all XX∗(A = I) and all X∗X (X∗in place of X) are
63 For given
! +∞
−∞
|φ(q)|2 dq
both
! +∞
−∞
q2|φ(q)|2 dq
and
! +∞
−∞
| d
dqφ(q)|2 dq
can be made arbitrarily large. Take, for example,
φ(q) = ae−bq2
The three integrals are all ﬁnite (b > 0!), but are proportional respectively to
a2b−1
2 ,
a2b−3
2 ,
a2b
so that the value of any two of them can be prescribed at will.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Hermitian. For unitary U, UAU–1 is Hermitian because U–1 = U∗.
The continuity of operators, just as in the case of the numerical functions
treated in analysis, is a property of basic importance. We therefore want to state
several characteristic conditions for its existence in the case of linear operators.
theorem 18.
A linear operator R is continuous if it is continuous
at the point f = 0.
A necessary and suﬃcient condition is the
existence of a constant C for which, in general, ∥Rf∥⩽C · ∥f∥. In
turn, this condition is equivalent to the general validity of
|(Rf, g)| ⩽C · ∥f∥· ∥g∥
For Hermitian R this need be required only for f = g:
|(Rf, f)| ⩽C · ∥f∥2
or, since (Rf, f) is real (Note 61):
−C · ∥f∥2 ⩽(Rf, f) ⩽+C · ∥f∥2
note.
The concept of continuity for operators originated with
Hilbert.64
He characterized it as “boundedness,” and deﬁned it
by the next to the last of the criteria given above.
If only one
of the ⩽in the last criterion is generally valid, then R is said to
be half-bounded, above or below. For example, each deﬁnite R is
half-bounded below (with C = 0).
proof: Continuity for f = 0 implies that for each ϵ > 0 there exists a δ > 0
such that ∥Rf∥< ϵ follows from ∥f∥< δ. Then it follows from ∥f −f0∥< δ
that
∥R(f −f0)∥= ∥Rf −Rf0∥< ϵ
i.e., that R is also continuous for f0, and therefore everywhere.
If ∥Rf∥⩽C · ∥f∥(of course, C > 0), then we have continuity: we can set
δ = ϵ/C. Conversely, if continuity exists we can determine the δ for ϵ = 1 and
set C = 2/δ. Then
∥Rf∥⩽C · ∥f∥
holds for f ̸= 0. For f ̸= 0 we have ∥f∥> 0 so can introduce
g =
2 δ
∥f∥· f
We then have ∥g∥= 1
2 δ and therefore
64 G¨ott. Nachr. 1906.


5. Operators in Hilbert Space
∥Rg∥=
2 δ
∥f∥· ∥Rf∥< 1,
∥Rf∥< ∥f∥
2δ = C · ∥f∥
From ∥Rf∥⩽C · ∥f∥it follows that
|(Rf, g)| ⩽∥Rf∥· ∥g∥⩽C · ∥f∥· ∥g∥
Conversely, from |(Rf, g)| ⩽C ·∥f∥·∥g∥we obtain ∥Rf∥2 ⩽C ·∥f∥·∥Rf∥if we
set g = Rf, and therefore ∥Rf∥⩽C ·∥f∥. It still remains to show for Hermitian
R that |(Rf, f)| ⩽C · ∥f∥2 leads to |(Rf, g)| ⩽C · ∥f∥· ∥g∥. Substitution of
2(f + g) and 1
2(f −g) for f gives65
|Re (Rf, g)| = |(R f+g
2 , f+g
2 ) −(R f−g
2 , f−g
2 )|
⩽C ·
)
∥f+g
2 ∥2 + ∥f−g
2 ∥2*
= C · ∥f∥2 + ∥g∥2
We now substitute af, 1a g for f, g, as in the proof of theorem 1. Minimizing
the right side gives |Re (Rf, g)| ⩽C · ∥f∥· ∥g∥.
Then replacing f by eiαf
(α real) gives for the maximum value of the left side
|(Rf, g)| ⩽C · ∥f∥· ∥g∥
Of course, this is valid only if Rg is deﬁned, but since these g are everywhere
dense and Rg no longer enters into the ﬁnal result, it holds generally by reason
of continuity.
theorem 19. If R is Hermitian and deﬁnite, then
|(Rf, g)| ⩽
(Rf, f) · (Rg, g)
From (Rf, f) = 0 it then follows that Rf = 0
proof: The above inequality follows from the general validity of (Rf, f) ⩾0
(deﬁniteness!), just as the Schwarz inequality
|(f, g)| ⩽
(f, f) · (g, g) = ∥f∥· ∥g∥
was derived in theorem 1 from (f, f) ⩾0. If now (Rf, f) = 0 then it follows
from this inequality that also (Rf, g) = 0, if Rg is deﬁned. Consequently, it
holds for a g-set which is everywhere dense, therefore, by reason of continuity,
for all g, giving Rf = 0.
65 The Hermitian character of R is important in the reduction
(R f+g
2 , f+g
2 ) −(R f−g
2 , f−g
2 ) = (Rf, g) + (Rg, f)
= (Rf, g) + (f, Rg)
(in the third step).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Finally we shall make reference to
the
important
concept
of
the
commutativity of two operators R, S; i.e., to the relation RS = SR.
From
RS = SR it follows that
S . . . SSR = S . . . SRS = S . . . RSS = . . . = RS . . . SS
i.e., R, Sn commute (n = 1, 2, . . .). Since RI = IR = R and S0 = I, this holds
also for n = 0. If S–1 exists then S
–1 · SR · S
–1 = S
–1 · RS · S
–1, therefore
S
–1 · SR · S
–1 = S
–1 S · RS
–1 = RS
–1
S
–1 · RS · S
–1 = S
–1R · SS
–1 = S
–1R
and hence RS
–1 = S
–1R. Consequently, n = −1 and therefore n = −2, −3, . . .
are also admissible.
That is, R commutes with all powers of S.
Repeated
application shows that each power of R commutes with each power of S. If
R commutes with S, T then it obviously commutes with all aS and also with
S + T, ST. Together with the above results, it follows from this that if R, S
commute then all polynomials of R commute with all polynomials of S.
In
particular, for R = S, all polynomials of R commute with each other.
6. THE EIGENVALUE PROBLEM
We have come now far enough that we can consider in abstract Hilbert
space a problem which is of central importance in quantum mechanics, in its
relationship to the special cases FZ and FΩ: the solution of (respectively) the
equations E1 and E2 in section I.3. We call this the eigenvalue problem, and we
must formulate it anew in a uniﬁed fashion.
In I.3, E1 and E2 both required the ﬁnding of all solutions φ ̸= 0 of
E
Hφ = λφ
where H is the Hermitian operator corresponding to the Hamiltonian function
(see the discussion in I.3), φ an element of the Hilbert space, and λ a real
number (H given, φ, λ to be determined). In connection with this, however,
certain requirements were made regarding the number of solutions to be found.
It was required to ﬁnd such a number that
1◦. in matrix theory, a matrix S = {sµν} could be formed from these solutions
φ1 = {s11, s21, . . .}
φ2 = {s12, s22, . . .},
etc.
(we are in FZ!) which possesses an inverse S –1 (see I.3);
2◦. in the wave theory, each wave function (which need not be a solution) can
be developed in a series of the solutions
φ1 = φ1(q1, . . . , qk)
φ2 = φ2(q1, . . . , qk),
etc.
(φ1, φ2, . . . may belong to diﬀerent λ):
φ(q1, . . . , qk) =
∞
n=1
Cnφn(q1, . . . , qk)


6. The Eigenvalue Problem
(There was no mention of this latter circumstance in I.3, but this requirement
is indispensable for the further development of the wave theory, in particular
for the Schr¨odinger “perturbation theory.”66)
Now 1◦amounts to the same thing as 2◦because the matrix S transforms
{1, 0, 0, . . .}, {0, 1, 0, . . .}, . . . respectively into
{s11, s21, s31, . . .}, {s12, s22, s32, . . .}, . . .
and therefore the entire Hilbert space R∞into the closed linear manifold
spanned by φ1, φ2, . . . . In order that S –1 exist therefore, the latter must also be
equal to R∞. But 2◦states the same thing directly: it also requires that each φ
can be approximated to an arbitrary degree of accuracy by a linear combination
of the φ1, φ2, . . . .67 Let us make the signiﬁcance of this condition clear, and also
prove once again the properties of the equation E with the formal apparatus
now at our command.
First, since φ ̸= 0 is required, and since aφ is a solution if φ is, it is suﬃcient
to consider solutions with ∥φ∥= 1. Second, we do not need to require that λ
be real, since this follows from Hφ = λφ:
(Hφ, φ) = (λφ, φ) = λ(φ, φ) = λ
(see II.5, Note 61). Third, the solutions φ1, φ2 which belong to diﬀerent λ1, λ2
are mutually orthogonal:
(Hφ1, φ2) = λ1(φ1, φ2)
(Hφ1, φ2) = (φ1, Hφ2) = λ2(φ1, φ2)
Therefore, (φ1, φ2) = 0 because λ1(φ1, φ2) = λ2(φ1, φ2) and λ1 ̸= λ2.
Now let λ1, λ2, . . . be the λ, all diﬀerent from one another, for which E is
solvable. (If we choose a solution φλ of absolute value 1 for each λ with solvable
Hφ = λφ, then the φλ form an orthonormal set, by reason of previous comments.
By II.2, theorem 3(∞) this set is then a ﬁnite or inﬁnite sequence. Therefore
we can also write the λ as a sequence, which may or may not terminate.) For
each λ = λρ all solutions of Hφ = λφ form a linear manifold, and indeed: a
closed linear manifold.68 According to theorem 9, therefore, there exists an
66 See the ﬁfth paper in the book mentioned in Note 9 (Ann. Phys. 80 (1926)).
67 We purposely do not go into the ﬁner questions of convergence; these
questions were not treated with exactness in the original forms of the matrix
and wave theories; also, we shall settle them later (see, e.g. II.9).
68 The latter is evident without further discussion only for continuous H
everywhere deﬁned; i.e., for which Hfn →f follows from fn →f. Moreover,
the following more limited property is also a consequence, as may easily be seen:
from fn →f, Hfn →f ∗it follows that Hf = f ∗(this is the so-called closure
of H; see the work of the author in Math. Ann. 102 (1929)). This is always
satisﬁed with the operators of quantum mechanics, even the discontinuous ones;
a Hermitian operator which is not closed can be made (Hermitian and) closed
by a unique extension of its domain (which is not the case for the property of
continuity, for example); see II.9, page 92, Note 96.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
orthonormal set φρ,1, . . . , φρ,νρ of such solutions which spans this closed linear
manifold.
The number νρ is clearly the maximum number of linearly
independent solutions for λ = λρ.
This is known as the multiplicity of the
eigenvalue λρ. (ν = 1, 2, . . . , ∞; ν = ∞can occur: look, for example, to the
case H = I, λ = 1.) According to the preceding discussion, the φρ,1, . . . , φρ,νρ
of two diﬀerent ρ are also mutually orthogonal. Therefore, the totality
φρ,ν
:
ρ = 1, 2, . . . ;
ν = 1, . . . , νρ
also forms an orthonormal set. By reason of its origin, we recognize that it
spans the same closed linear manifold as all solutions φ of E.
We number the φρ,ν in any order by ψ1, ψ2, . . . and the corresponding
λρ by λ(1), λ(2), . . . .
The condition previously formulated that all solutions
of E should span R∞as a closed linear manifold then implies that ψ1, ψ2, . . .
(a subset of solutions!) must do this by itself—therefore, by theorem 7, that
this orthonormal set is complete.
The solution of the eigenvalue problem in the sense of quantum mechanics
would therefore require the ﬁnding of a suﬃcient number of solutions
ψ = ψ1, ψ2, . . .
and
λ = λ1, λ2, . . .
of E so that a complete orthonormal set can be formed from them. But this
is not possible in general. For example, in wave theory we will see that for
a certain subset of solutions of E (i.e., of E2 in I.3)—all of which are needed
to develop each wave function by solutions (see above)—there exists no ﬁnite
value for the integral of the square of the absolute value.69 Therefore it does
not belong to Hilbert space. Hence there is no complete orthonormal set of
solutions in Hilbert space (and we consider Hilbert spaces only in E!).
On the other hand, the Hilbert theory of the eigenvalue problem shows
that this phenomenon does not at all represent an exception to the behavior of
operators (not even of the continuous ones).70 We must therefore analyze the
situations which result when it does occur. (We will soon see what this means
physically. See III.3.) If it occurs; i.e., if the orthonormal set selected from the
solutions of E is not complete, then we may say that a “continuous spectrum
of H” exists. (λ1, λ2, . . . form the “point” or “discrete” spectrum of H.)
Our next problem, since E has failed, is then to ﬁnd an improved
formulation of the eigenvalue problem for Hermitian operators and to apply
this to quantum mechanics. We follow a pattern set by Hilbert (see above,
Note 70), which must now be explained.
69 See, for example, Schr¨odinger’s treatment of the hydrogen atom, in the
reference cited in Note 16.
70 See the reference cited in Note 64.


7. Continuation
7. CONTINUATION
The equation
Hφ = λφ
—as well as the requirement that a complete orthonormal set can be formed
from its solutions—originates in an analogy with the case of ﬁnite dimensions,
the Rn.
In Rn, H is a matrix
H = {hµν}
:
µν = 1, 2, . . . , n ; hµν = hνµ
and it is a well-known algebraic fact that the solutions of
Hx = λx
:
x = {x1, x2, . . . , xn}
i.e., form a complete orthonormal set.71
This property of the Rn cannot, as we have seen, carry over by n →∞to
the R∞. So the eigenvalue problem in R∞must be formulated diﬀerently. We
shall now see that the eigenvalue problem in Rn can be transformed in such
a way that for this new formulation (which in Rn is equivalent to the old) a
transition to R∞does become possible. That is, both express the same thing in
Rn (n = 1, 2, . . .)—namely, the possibility of the diagonalization of Hermitian
matrices—but the one can be carried over into R∞while the other cannot.
Let {x11, . . . , x1n}, . . . , {xn1, . . . , xnn} be the complete orthonormal set of
solutions of the eigenvalue equation, and let λ1, . . . , λn be the corresponding λ.
The vectors {x11, . . . , x1n}, . . . , {xn1, . . . , xnn} then form a cartesian coordinate
system in Rn. The transformation formulas of the coordinates x1, . . . , xn in this
coordinate system to coordinates ξ1, . . . , ξn that refer to the basis
{1, 0, 0, . . . , 0}, {0, 1, 0, . . . , 0}, . . . , {0, 0, 0, . . . , 1}
then run as follows:
{ξ1, . . . , ξn} = x1{x11, . . . , x1n} + · · · + xn{xn1, . . . , xnn}
i.e.,
ξ1 =
n
µ=1
xµ1xµ ,
. . . ,
ξn =
n
µ=1
xµnxµ
and conversely,
x1 =
n
µ=1
x1µξµ ,
. . . ,
xn =
n
µ=1
xnµξµ
We can write the conditions
n
ν=1
hµνxρν = λρxρµ
:
ρ = 1, . . . , n
71 See Courant-Hilbert: the reference cited in Note 30.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
as follows, with the help of the variables x1, . . . , xn and a new set of variables
η1, . . . , ηn (in addition to corresponding variables y1, . . . , yn) by reason of the
above formula:
n
ρ,µ=1
)
n
ν=1
hµνxρν
*
xρ¯ηµ =
n
ρ,µ=1
λρxρµxρ¯ηµ
i.e.,
D
n
µ,ν=1
hµνξν ¯ηµ =
n
ρ=1
λρ
)
n
µ=1
¯xρµξµ
*)
n
µ=1
¯xρµηµ
*
The cartesian character of our coordinate system may then be expressed as
O
n
µ=1
ξµ¯ηµ =
n
ρ=1
)
n
µ=1
¯xρµξµ
*)
n
µ=1
¯xρµηµ
*
The discovery of a matrix {xρµ} with the properties D, O is then equivalent
in Rn to solution of the eigenvalue problem. And in this form the transition to
R∞again fails. But this failure is not surprising, for the following reason: The
conditions D, O do not determine the unknowns λρ, xρµ completely. Indeed, as
the theory of this diagonal transformation shows (see the reference in Note 71),
the λρ are determined uniquely except for order, but the situation is much worse
in the case of the xρµ. Each row {xρ,1, . . . , xρn} can evidently be multiplied by a
complex factor θρ of absolute value 1. And if several of the λρ coincide, even an
arbitrary unitary transformation of the corresponding columns {xρ,1, . . . , xρn}
is possible! To attempt the diﬃcult transition to the limit n →∞with such
quantities, which are not uniquely determined, is hopeless: for how can the
process converge if the λρ, xρµ can undergo the arbitrarily large ﬂuctuations
which become possible because of the incompleteness of their determination?
But this points out the way in which the problem can be handled correctly:
we must ﬁrst seek to replace the conditions D, O and the unknowns λρ, xρµ by
conditions and unknowns which possess the desired uniqueness property. It will
be shown that the limiting process then causes less diﬃculty.
If ℓis any value which one or more of the λρ assume, then
λρ=ℓ
)
n
µ=1
¯xρµξµ
*)
n
µ=1
¯xρµηµ
*
is invariant under the variations (compatible with D, O) of λρ, xρµ mentioned
above. If ℓis diﬀerent from all the λρ then the sum vanishes, and is therefore
certainly invariant.
Consequently the Hermitian form (here ξ and η signify
ξ1, . . . , ξn and η1, . . . , ηn respectively)
E(ℓ; ξ, η) =
λρ⩽ℓ
)
n
µ=1
¯xρµξµ
*)
n
µ=1
¯xρµηµ
*


7. Continuation
is also invariant (ℓarbitrary!). If we know the E(ℓ; ξ, η) (i.e., their coeﬃcients),
then it is easy to reason back from this point to the λρ, xµν. Then, if we so
formulate the eigenvalue problem (i.e., D, O) that only the E(ℓ; ξ, η) appear
(instead of the λρ, xµν), we will have achieved the desired unique formulation.
Therefore, let E(ℓ) be the matrix of the Hermitian form E(ℓ; ξ, η).72 What
do D, O now mean for the family of matrices E(ℓ)?
O means: if ℓis suﬃciently large (namely, larger than all λρ) then E(ℓ) = I
(the unit matrix). From the nature of E(ℓ) it follows that if ℓis suﬃciently
small (that is, smaller than all λρ) then E(ℓ) = O and, as ℓincreases from
−∞to +∞, E(ℓ) remains constant except at a ﬁnite number of points (the
diﬀerent values among the λ1, . . . , λn which we call ℓ1 < ℓ2 < . . . < ℓm; m ⩽n),
at which it changes discontinuously. Furthermore, the discontinuity lies to the
left of the point in question (because the
λρ⩽ℓ
is continuous to the right as a function of ℓ, while for the case
λρ<ℓ
it would be just the opposite). Finally, as we shall show, for ℓ′ ⩽ℓ′′
E(ℓ′)E(ℓ′′) = E(ℓ′′)E(ℓ′) = E(ℓ′)
(matrix product!).
It is more convenient to prove this for E(ℓ′; ξ, η), E(ℓ′′; ξ, η) in the
coordinate system to which the x1, . . . , xn and y1, . . . , yn refer.
After the
introduction of these variables we obtain from E(ℓ′; ξ, η) and E(ℓ′′; ξ, η)
λρ⩽ℓ′
xρy¯ρ
and
λρ⩽ℓ′′
xρy¯ρ
The matrices are therefore as follows: 0 except on the diagonal; 1 on the
diagonal in the ρth ﬁeld if λρ ⩽ℓ′ or ⩽ℓ′′ but otherwise also 0. For such
matrices the above proposition is evident.
72 That is,
E(ℓ) = {eµν(ℓ)},
E(ℓ; ξ, η) =
n
µ,ν=1
eµν(ℓ)ξµ¯ην
Consequently,
eµν(ℓ) =
λρ⩽ℓ
xρµ¯xρν


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Now let us reformulate D. It clearly means
n
µ,ν=1
hµν ξν ¯ηµ =
m
τ=1
ℓτ
E(ℓτ; ξ, η) −E(ℓτ−1; ξ, η)
where ℓ0 is any number < ℓ1. But since E(ℓ; ξ, η) is constant in each of the
intervals
−∞< ℓ< ℓ1
ℓ1 ⩽ℓ< ℓ2
...
ℓm−1 ⩽ℓ< ℓm
ℓm ⩽ℓ< +∞
then for each set of numbers Λ0 < Λ1 < Λ2 < · · · < Λk, if ℓ1, . . . , ℓm appear
among them,
n
µ,ν=1
hµν ξν ¯ηµ =
k
τ=1
Λτ
E(Λτ; ξ, η) −E(Λτ−1; ξ, η)
By application of the Stieltjes concept of integral,73 this can also be written as
73 For the concept of the Stieltjes integral, see Perron, Die Lehre von den
Kettenbr¨uchen, Leipzig, 1913 and also, for particular consideration of the
requirements of operator theory, Carleman, ´Equations int´egrales singuli`eres,
Upsala, 1923. For the reader who is less interested in such things, the following
deﬁnition will suﬃce: for a subdivision Λ0, Λ1, . . . , Λk of the interval a, b
a ⩽Λ0 < Λ1 < · · · < Λk ⩽b
we form the sum
k
τ=1
f(Λτ)
g(Λτ) −g(Λτ−1)
If this always converges as the subdivisions Λ0, Λ1, Λ2, . . . , Λk are made smaller
and smaller, then the integral
! b
a
f(x) dg(x)
exists and is deﬁned to be equal to this limit. (For g(x) = x this goes over into
the well-known Riemann integral.) In our case, therefore, the equation which
has been derived means that ! +∞
−∞
x dE(x; ξ, η)
exists (we have denoted the variable by λ instead of x) and is equal to
n
µ,ν−=1
hµν ξν ¯ηµ


7. Continuation
n
!
µ,ν =1
hµν ξν ¯ηµ =
" +∞
−∞
λ dE(λ; ξ, η)
(
# +∞
−∞can obviously be replaced by
# b
a if a < ℓ1, b > ℓm.) Or, if we consider
the coeﬃcients, and write down instead of the matrices themselves the equation
which is valid for all coeﬃcients,
H =
" +∞
−∞
λ dE(λ)
where H = {hµν}.
Thus far, then, the problem is the following: For a given Hermitian matrix
H a family of Hermitian matrices E(λ) (−∞< λ < +∞) with the following
properties is sought:
S1. For suﬃciently
$
small
large
%
λ, E(λ) =
$
O
I
%
.
E(λ) is (considered as a function of λ) everywhere constant, with the exception
of a ﬁnite number of points at which it changes discontinuously.
Also, the
discontinuity always occurs to the left of the given point.
S2. It is always true that E(λ′)E(λ′′) = E(Min(λ′, λ′′)).74
S3. We have (using the Stieltjes integral)
H =
" +∞
−∞
λ dE(λ)
At present we shall not stop to carry out the converse process; i.e., going from
S1, S2 and S3 back to D, O (although this would be simple) because only the
present form of the eigenvalue problem will be needed in quantum mechanics.
Instead, we shall proceed at once to generalize S1–S3 from a ﬁnite number to
an inﬁnite number of variables; i.e., from Rn to R∞.
In R∞the roles of H and E(λ) will be taken over by Hermitian operators
H and E(λ); we shall seek to determine, for a given H, a family E(λ) that is
related to it in a certain fashion, modeled on S1–S3. Therefore, it suﬃces to
ﬁnd the R∞analog of S1–S3.
The property S2 remains unchanged in the transition, since the number of
dimensions of Rn plays no role in it. But we want to transform it in a way that
makes use of our results on projections (II.4). First, the property in question
implies in the case λ′ = λ′′ = λ that E(λ)2 = E(λ); i.e., that the E(λ) must be
projections. But then (we can limit ourselves to λ′ ⩽λ′′ since corresponding
results are obtained for λ′ ⩾λ′′) S2 means this:
Min(a, b, . . . , e) is the smallest, Max(a, b, . . . , e) is the largest of the
ﬁnite set of real numbers a, b, . . . , e.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
λ′ ⩽λ′′
implies
E(λ′) ⩽E(λ′′)
(see theorem 14 and subsequent text in II.4).
Some caution is required,
however, in the case S3: the expression
H =
" +∞
−∞
λ dE(λ)
is meaningless, since the Stieltjes integral is deﬁned for numbers and not for
operators. But it is easy to replace H, E(λ) by numbers; i.e., to present that
equation as a relationship among numbers. We require
(Hf, g) =
" +∞
−∞
λ (dE(λ)f, g)
for all f, g of R∞, so far as Hf is deﬁned. It is in that sense—as a formal
abbreviation—that S3 is henceforth to be understood.
Lastly, the property S1 is essentially aﬀected by the transition to an inﬁnite
number of dimensions.
The points beyond which E(λ) assumes its terminal
values 0 or 1, or where E(λ) executes its terminal jumps, are (in Rn) the
eigenvalues of H and intervals of constancy are those free from eigenvalues. But
if now n →∞, many things can happen. The smallest or largest eigenvalue can
approach −∞or +∞respectively, while the others may cluster increasingly
densely, since their number can increase arbitrarily, and thus the intervals of
constancy may gradually contract to points.
(This last circumstance is the
symptom which, in the Hilbert theory, under certain circumstances indicates
the appearance of a continuous spectrum.75)
We must therefore change S1
considerably in the transition from Rn to R∞.
Allowance must be made
for the possibility that the variation of E(λ) may no longer show a discrete,
discontinuous character.
With this point in view, it becomes natural to abandon the assumption that
E(λ) assumes terminal values 0 or 1, and to require only convergence to 0 or 1
(as λ →−∞or λ →+∞, respectively). Then, in place of intervals of constancy
and points of discontinuity, there emerges the possibility of continuous increase.
On the other hand, we may try to maintain the less stringent requirement that
at the possible points of discontinuity the discontinuity should appear only from
the left. Consequently, we formulate S1 as follows: for λ →−∞, E(λ) →O;
for λ →+∞, E(λ) →I; for λ →λ0, λ ⩾λ0, E(λ) →E(λ0).76
75 See the reference of Note 64, as well as the book of Carleman mentioned
in Note 73. We shall have a great deal to do with this “continuous spectrum;”
see II.8.
76 By A(λ) →B (where A(λ), B are operators in R∞and λ a real parameter)
we mean that for all f of R∞, A(λ)f →B. It is in this sense that operator
convergence statements should be understood in Hilbert space.


7. Continuation
Something must still be said regarding S3. In a space with a ﬁnite number
of dimensions
H =
m
!
τ=1
ℓτFτ
where
Fτ = E(ℓτ) −E(ℓτ−1)
Because of S1 we have for σ ⩾τ
FτE(ℓσ) = E(ℓτ)E(ℓσ) −E(ℓτ−1)E(ℓσ)
= E(ℓτ) −E(ℓτ−1)
= Fτ
while for σ ⩽τ −1
FτE(ℓσ) = E(ℓτ)E(ℓσ) −E(ℓτ−1)E(ℓσ)
= E(ℓσ) −E(ℓσ)
= O
Therefore, because Fσ = E(ℓσ) −E(ℓσ−1),
Fτ · Fσ =
&
Fτ
for
τ = σ
O
for
τ ̸= σ
From this
H2 =
' m
!
τ=1
ℓτFτ
(2
=
m
!
τ,σ=1
ℓτℓσFτFσ =
m
!
τ=1
ℓ2
τ Fτ
and in the same way, Hp = )m
τ=1 ℓp
τ Fτ. Consequently
H2 =
" +∞
−∞
λ2 dE(λ)
which is analogous to the equation that holds for H itself. In R∞we assume
the analogous symbolic relation
H2 =
" +∞
−∞
λ2 dE(λ)
which acquires speciﬁc meaning from
(H2f, g) =
" +∞
−∞
λ2 d(E(λ)f, g)
(This will actually be conﬁrmed in our subsequent considerations.) For f = g
we have
(H2f, f) = (Hf, Hf) = ∥Hf∥2,
(E(λ)f, f) = ∥E(λ)f∥2
hence
∥Hf∥2 =
" +∞
−∞
λ2 d(∥E(λ)f∥2)


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
This formula, however, causes us to expect that E(λ) not only determines
the value of Hf, whenever it is deﬁned, but also whether it is deﬁned for a
particular f. For the integral
" +∞
−∞
λ2 d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
has a non-negative integrand (λ2 ⩾0) and a monotonically increasing expression
under the diﬀerential sign (E(∥λ)f∥2; see S2 and theorem 15 in II.4). Therefore
it is by its nature convergent, i.e., zero or positive and ﬁnite, or else is properly
divergent (= +∞).77
This is true independently of the relation to H, i.e.,
without consideration as to whether Hf is deﬁned or not.
It is then to be
expected that Hf is deﬁned (i.e., exists in R∞) if and only if the presumed
value of ∥Hf∥2 is ﬁnite; that is, the above expression is deﬁned for all f.
Therefore our new formulation of S1–S3 runs as follows: For the given
Hermitian operator H we seek a family of projections E(λ) (−∞< λ < +∞)
with the following properties:
S1. For λ −→
$
−∞
+∞
%
we have E(λ) −→
$
f
%
respectively.
For λ →λ0, λ ⩾λ0 we have E(λ)f →E(λ0)f (for each f!).
S2. From λ′ ⩽λ′′ it follows that E(λ′) ⩽E(λ′′).
S3. The integral
# +∞
−∞λ2 d(∥E(λ)f∥2), which by its nature is
convergent (zero or positive and ﬁnite) or properly divergent
(+∞), determines the domain of H: Hf is deﬁned in and only
in the non-divergent case, in which case
(Hf, g) =
" +∞
−∞
λ d(E(λ)f, g)
(The latter integral is absolutely convergent whenever the
expression on the left is ﬁnite.78)
The operator H does not enter into the description of the properties S1
and S2. A family of projections E(λ) with these two properties is known as a
“resolution of the identity.” A resolution of the identity which stands in the
relation S3 to H is said to belong to H.
The eigenvalue problem in R∞then runs as follows: Do there exist, for
a given Hermitian operator H, resolutions of the identity belonging to H, and
if so: how many? (The desired answer would be: there always exists exactly
one.) Furthermore, we must establish how deﬁnition of the eigenvalue problem
77 This follows from the deﬁnition of the Stieltjes integral given in Note 73.
For proof, see the reference given there.
78 See Math. Ann 102 (1929).


8. Initial Considerations
is related to the general methods used in quantum mechanics (especially in the
wave theory) for the determination of the eigenvalues of Hermitian operators.
8. INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS
CONCERNING THE EIGENVALUE PROBLEM
The ﬁrst question which arises from our deﬁnition of the eigenvalue problem
is this: S1– S3 sound entirely diﬀerent from the problem with which we started
at the beginning of the last section, and their relevance to that problem is
no longer recognizable. It is true that we were led in Rn from that problem
to formulation of the conditions S1– S3, but in R∞the conditions—though
they remain equivalent in Rn, as was previously noted—have been essentially
modiﬁed. Therefore, the entire question is reopened, and we must ascertain
how far the new formulation coincides with the old; i.e., when and how our
E(λ) determined the λ1, λ2, . . . and the φ1, φ2, . . . .
If the resolution of the identity E(λ) belongs to the Hermitian operator A,
when is the equation
Aφ = λ0φ
solvable? Aφ = λ0φ means (Aφ, g) −λ0(φ, g) = 0 for all g; i.e.,
0 =
" +∞
−∞
λd(E(λ)f, g) −λ0(f, g)
=
" +∞
−∞
λd(E(λ)f, g) −λ0
" +∞
−∞
d(E(λ)f, g)
=
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(E(λ)f, g)
We ﬁrst set g = E(λ0)f; then
0 =
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(E(λ)f, E(λ0)f)
=
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(E(λ0)E(λ)f, f)
=
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(E(Min(λ, λ0))f, f)
=
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(∥E(Min(λ, λ0))f∥2)
We now write
# +∞
−∞=
# λ0
−∞+
# +∞
λ0
. We can replace Min(λ, λ0) by λ in
# λ0
−∞and
by λ0 in
# +∞
λ0
. In the latter integral a constant appears behind the diﬀerential
sign, so that integral vanishes. But the ﬁrst integral remains, and can be written
" λ0
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(∥E(λ)f∥2) = 0


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Return now to the beginning of the preceding argument and set g = f; then
0 =
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(E(λ)f, f) =
" +∞
−∞
(λ −λ0)d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
Subtracting the preceding result from this, we get (after reversing the sign of
the integrand)
" +∞
λ0
(λ0 −λ)d(∥E(λ)f∥2) = 0
Let us now examine
" λ0
−∞
(λ0 −λ)d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
and
" +∞
λ0
(λ −λ0)d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
somewhat more closely. The integrand in each case is ⩾0, and behind the
diﬀerential sign there is a monotonically increasing function of λ. Therefore we
have, for each ϵ > 0,
0 =
" λ0
−∞
(λ0 −λ)d(∥E(λ)f∥2) ⩾
" λ0−ϵ
−∞
(λ0 −λ)d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
⩾
" λ0−ϵ
−∞
ϵ · d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
= ϵ∥E(λ0 −ϵ)f∥2
0 =
" +∞
λ0
(λ −λ0)d(∥E(λ)f∥2) ⩾
" +∞
λ0+ϵ
(λ −λ0)d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
⩾
" +∞
λ0+ϵ
ϵ · d(∥E(λ)f∥2)
= ϵ
*
∥f∥2 −∥E(λ0 + ϵ)f∥2+
= ϵ∥f −E(λ0 + ϵ)f∥2
The right sides are ⩽0, but since they are also ⩾0 they must vanish. Therefore
E(λ0 −ϵ)f = 0
E(λ0 + ϵ)f = f
Because of the right hand continuity of E(λ) we may carry out ϵ →0 in the
second equation: E(λ0)f = f. For λ ⩾λ0 then, because of the second equation
(ϵ = λ −λ0 ⩾0), E(λ)f = f, while for λ < λ0, because of the ﬁrst equation
(ϵ = λ0 −λ > 0), E(λ)f = 0. Therefore
E(λ)f =
&
f
for
λ ⩾λ0
for
λ < λ0
But this necessary condition is also suﬃcient, because from it it follows that
(Af, g) =
" +∞
−∞
λ d(E(λ)f, g) = λ0(f, g)
(the deﬁnition of the Stieltjes integral given in Note 73 should be recalled),
therefore (Af −λ0f, g) = 0 for all g; i.e., Af = λ0f.


8. Initial Considerations
What does this mean? First, it involves a discontinuity of E(λ) at the point
λ = λ0. By theorem 17 in II.4, E(λ) converges to a projection: call it E(1)(λ)
for λ →λ0, λ < λ0 or E(2)(λ) for λ →λ0, λ > λ0.79 By S1, E(2)(λ0) = E(λ0),
but because of the discontinuityE(1)(λ0) ̸= E(λ0). Further, because E(λ) ⩽E(λ0)
for λ < λ0, we by S2 have E(1)(λ0) ⩽E(λ0). Therefore E(λ0) −E(1)(λ0) is a
projection, and it is characteristic for the discontinuity that it ̸= O.
E(λ)f = 0 for all λ < λ0 has E(1)(λ)f = 0 as a consequence, from which
(by E(λ) ⩽E(1)(λ)) it also follows. E(λ)f = f for all λ ⩾λ0 follows from
E(λ0)f = f by the following argument: E(λ0) ⩽E(λ), E(λ)E(λ0) = E(λ0),
therefore E(λ)f = E(λ)E(λ0)f = E(λ0)f = f. Hence E(1)(λ0)f = 0, E(λ0)f = f
is characteristic for Af = λ0f, or (theorem 14, II.4) [E(λ0) −E(1)(λ0)]f = f.
That is, if we write
E(λ0) −E(1)(λ0) = PMλ0
then the above implies that f belongs to Mλ0.
Consequently, it has been shown that Af = λf is solvable by an f ̸= 0
only at the discontinuities of E(λ), and the solutions f form the closed linear
manifold Mλ0 deﬁned above.
The complete orthonormal set sought in II.6, to be selected from these
solutions(combining any λ), then exists if and only if the Mλ0(−∞< λ0 < +∞)
together span the closed linear manifold R∞. We have discussed in II.6 how the
construction of this set would then be accomplished. The mutual orthogonality
of the Mλ0 can be seen in another way: from λ0 < µ0 it follows that
PMλ0PMµ0 = [E(λ0) −E(1)(λ0)][E(µ0) −E(1)(µ0)] = O
because
E(λ0) = E(1)(λ0) ⩽E(µ0) ⩽E(1)(µ0)
E(µ0) −E(1)(µ0) ⩽I −E(1)(µ0)
Without ascertaining the precise conditions under which this is true, we note
the following: if an interval µ1, µ2 exists in which E(λ) increases monotonically
(i.e., µ1 < µ2, E(λ) is continuous in µ1 ⩽λ ⩽µ2, E(µ1) ⩽E(µ2)) then it is
certainly not the case. Because for λ ⩽µ1, E(λ) −E(1)(λ) ⩽E(λ) ⩽E(µ1)
while for µ1 ⩽λ ⩽µ2, E(λ) −E(1)(λ) = 0 because of continuity, and for
µ2 < λ, E(λ) −E(1)(λ) ⩽I −E(1)(λ) ⩽I −E(µ2). Therefore E(λ) −E(1)(λ) is
always orthogonal to E(µ2) −E(µ1). Let E(µ2) −E(µ1) = PN. Then all Mλ
are orthogonal to N. If a complete orthonormal set were to be chosen from
79 This was shown only for λ sequences. However, the limit for all such λ
sequences (λ →λ0 and λ < λ0 or λ > λ0) must be the same because two
such sequences can be combined to form one, and since this has a limit, both
constituents must have the same limit. From this it follows that the convergence
(to the common limit of all sequences) also occurs in the case of continuous
variation of λ.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
this, then N would contain only the zero; i.e., E(µ2) −E(µ1) = O, contrary to
assumption.
The discontinuities of E(λ) are known as the discrete spectrum of A. They
are the same λ for which Af = λf, f ̸= 0 is solvable. If we choose from each
Mλ ̸= 0 an f with ∥f∥= 1 then, because of the orthogonality of the Mλ,
an orthonormal set is obtained. By theorem 3 in II.3 this is ﬁnite, or is a
sequence. Therefore the λ of the discrete spectrum form at most a sequence.
All points in whose neighborhood E(λ) is not constant form the spectrum
of A. We have seen that if there are intervals into which the spectrum—but
not the point spectrum—of A penetrates (i.e., intervals of continuity of E(λ) in
which it is not constant), then the eigenvalue problem is certainly not solvable
in the same sense as that in which it was formulated at the beginning of II.6. The
precise conditions for this insolvability we do not investigate further, because
insolvability may also arise under certain other circumstances, when the discrete
spectrum does penetrate into all intervals in which points of the spectrum lie.
The separation of the discrete spectrum from the rest of the spectrum is then
considerably more laborious, and is beyond the scope of this work. (The reader
will ﬁnd these investigations in Hilbert’s papers, which have been referred to
previously).
On the other hand, we do want to show how in cases where there does
exist a complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . of solutions of Aφ = λφ (with
λ = λ1, λ2, . . . corresponding to φ = φ1, φ2, . . .)—cases with a pure discrete
spectrum, as we shall say—the E(λ) are to be constructed. We have80
E(λ) =
!
λρ⩽λ
P[φρ]
(The sum ) can have 0 summands, giving E(λ) = O.
Or a ﬁnite positive
number, when its meaning is clear.
Or indeﬁnitely many, in which case it
converges according to the ﬁnal considerations of II.4.)
S2 is evident, because for λ′ ⩽λ′′
E(λ′′) −E(λ′) =
!
λ′<λρ ⩽λ′′
P[φρ]
is a projection, therefore E(λ′) ⩽E(λ′′) (theorem 14 ).
We prove S1 as follows: For each f we by theorem 7 have81
!
ρ
∥P[φρ]f∥2 =
!
ρ
|(f, φρ)|2 = ∥f∥2
i.e., )
ρ ∥P[φρ]f∥2 is convergent. Therefore for each ϵ > 0 we can give a ﬁnite
80 This is the precise restatement of the deﬁnition of E(λ; ξ, η) given in II.7.
81 Recall in this connection that, as the construction carried out in the proof
of theorem 10 shows, if ∥φ∥= 1 then P[φ]f = (f, φ) · φ gives
∥P[φ]f∥= |(f, φ)| = |(φ, f)|


8. Initial Considerations
number of ρ so that the sum )
ρ taken over these alone is > ∥f∥2 −ϵ, and
therefore each )′
ρ from which they are missing is < ϵ. Then also
∥
!
ρ
′P[φρ]f∥2 =
!
ρ
′∥P[φρ]f∥2 < ϵ
From this it follows in particular that
∥
!
λρ ⩽λ
P[φρ]f∥2 < ϵ
:
λ suﬃciently small
∥
!
λρ >λ
P[φρ]f∥2 < ϵ
:
λ suﬃciently large
∥
!
λ0 <λρ ⩽λ
P[φρ]f∥2 < ϵ
:
λ ⩾λ0 near enough to λ0
Then82
E(λ)f =
!
λρ ⩽λ
P[φρ]f
−→0 for λ →−∞
f −E(λ)f =
!
λρ >λ
P[φρ]f
−→0 for λ →+∞
E(λ)f −E(λ0)f =
!
λ0 <λρ ⩽λ
P[φρ]f
−→0 for λ(⩾λ0) →λ0
i.e., S1 is satisﬁed.
In order to convince ourselves of the validity of S3, we set
f = x1φ1 + x2φ2 + · · ·
:
then
A = λ1x1φ1 + λ2x2φ2 + · · ·
In order that Af be deﬁned, )∞
ρ=1 λ2
ρ|xρ|2 must be ﬁnite. But83
" +∞
∞
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2 =
" +∞
∞
λ2d
' !
λρ ⩽λ
|xρ|2(
=
∞
!
ρ=1
λ2
ρ|xρ|2
" +∞
∞
λ d(E(λ)f, g) =
" +∞
∞
λ d
' !
λρ ⩽λ
xρyρ
(
=
∞
!
ρ=1
λρxρyρ = (Af, g)
82 We have (by theorem 7)
f =
!
ρ
(f, φρ) · φρ =
!
ρ
P[φρ]f
This also follows from the ﬁnal considerations of II.4, and pertains to the second
of the following equations.
83 By Note 73,
" +∞
∞
λ2d
' !
λρ ⩽λ
|xρ|2(
= lim
k
!
τ=1
Λ2
τ
·
!
Λτ−1<λρ ⩽Λτ
|xρ|2
If, throughout, Λ2
τ −Λ2
τ−1 < ϵ (i.e., if the Λ0, Λ1, . . . , Λk mesh is suﬃciently
ﬁne) the expression on the right changes by less than ϵ )∞
ρ=1 |xρ|2 = ϵ∥f∥2 if


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Consequently, S3 is satisﬁed.
Let us consider two cases of a pure continuous spectrum; i.e., two cases in
which there exists no discrete spectrum. We take as our ﬁrst example the case
in which R∞is the space of all functions f(q1, . . . , qℓ) with ﬁnite
"
· · ·
" +∞
−∞
|f(q1, . . . , qℓ)|2dq1 · · · dqℓ
and A is the operator qj· , the Hermitian character of which is evident.
Evidently Af = λf implies that
(qj −λ)f(q1, . . . , qℓ) = 0
i.e., f(q1, . . . , qℓ) = 0 everywhere, with the possible exception of the ℓ−1
dimensional plane qj = λ. However, this plane is (according to the discussion
in II.3 relative to condition B) unimportant, because its Lebesgue measure
(i.e., volume) is zero. Then f ≡0.84 Consequently there exists no non-zero
solution of Af = λf. But we also see (inexactly) where the solution is to be
we replace it by
k
!
τ=1
!
Λτ−1<λρ ⩽Λτ
λ2
ρ|xρ|2 =
!
Λ0<λρ ⩽Λk
λ2
ρ|xρ|2
and if Λ0 is small enough, and Λk large enough, this is arbitrarily close to
∞
!
τ=1
λ2
ρ|xρ|2
This sum is then the desired limit; i.e., the value of the integral. The next
integral formula is proved in exactly the same way.
At this point the correct mathematical method followed by us deviates
from the symbolic method of Dirac (see, e.g., his book mentioned in Note 1).
The latter method in essence is to consider the f with (q −λ)f(q) ≡0 as
solutions (for simplicity we set ℓ= j = 1, qj = q). But since each (f, g) =
#
f(q)g(q)dq = 0 and f(q) ̸= 0, f(q) is inﬁnite at the point q = λ (the only
point where it diﬀers from zero!), and indeed, so strongly inﬁnite that (f, g) ̸= 0.
Since for q ̸= λ, f(q) = 0 the integral
#
f(q)g(q)dq can depend only on g(λ),
and indeed it is clear that the integral, because of its additive property, must
be proportional to g(λ). It suﬃces, of course, to consider the case λ = 0. We
write f(q) = δ(q), which is deﬁned by
∆
qδ(q) = 0
and
"
δ(q)f(q) = f(0)
For arbitrary λ, δ(q −λ) is a solution; although a function δ with the property
∆does not exist, there are function sequences which converge toward such


8. Initial Considerations
expected. (qj −λ)f(q1, . . . , qℓ) = 0 implies that only for qj = λ may f ̸= 0.
A linear combination of the solutions for several λ, say λ = λ′, λ′′, . . . , λ(s),
would then be non-zero for
qj = λ′, λ′′, . . . , λ(s)
We can then consider an f as a linear combination of all solutions with λ ⩽λ0
if it is non-zero only for λ ⩽λ0. But in the case of the pure discrete spectrum
we had
E(λ0) =
!
λρ ⩽λ0
P[φρ] = PNλ0,
Nλ0 = [φρ:λρ⩽λ0]
i.e., Nλ consisted of the linear combinations of all φρ with λρ ⩽λ0; i.e., of all
solutions of Af = λf with λ ⩽λ0. Consequently—to be sure, inexactly and
heuristically—it is to be expected that
E(λ0) = PNλ0
where Nλ0 consists of those f which ̸= 0 only for qj ⩽λ0. R∞−N∞then clearly
consists of those f which always vanish for qj > 0; consequently
E(λ0)f(q1, . . . , qℓ) =
& f(q1, . . . , qℓ)
for
qj ⩽λ0
for
qj > λ0
In a rather inexact way, then, we have found a family of projections E(λ)
of which it is to be supposed that they satisfy S1– S3 for our A. In fact, S1 and
S2 are satisﬁed in a trivial fashion; indeed, for S1 the λ →λ0 case holds even
without the condition λ ⩾λ0; i.e., E(λ) is continuous everywhere. In order
to see that S3 also is satisﬁed, it suﬃces to prove the validity of the following
equations (in which all unstated upper/lower limits are ±∞):
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2 =#
λ2d
*#
···# λ
−∞···#
|f(q1,...,qj,...,qℓ)|2dq1...dqj...dqℓ
+
=#
λ2*#
···#
|f(q1,...,qj−1,λ,qj+1,...,qℓ)|2dq1...dqj−1dqj+1...dqℓ
+
dλ
=#
···#
q2
j |f(q1,...,qj−1,qj,qj+1,...,qℓ)|2dq1...dqj−1dqjdqj+1...dqℓ
= ∥Af∥2
behavior (even though the limiting function does not exist). For example,
fϵ(q) =
& 1
2ϵ
for
|x| < ϵ
for
|x| ⩾ϵ
as
ϵ →+0
and
fa(q) =
,
a
πe−ax2
as
a →+∞
provide instances of such sequences (see also I.3, particularly Note 32).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
" +∞
−∞
λ d(E(λ)f, g) =#
λd
*#
···# λ
−∞···#
f(q1,...,qj,...,qℓ)g(q1,...,qj,...,qℓ)dq1...dqj...dqℓ
=#
λ
*#
···#
f(q1,...,qj−1,λ,qj+1,...,qℓ)g(q1,...,qj−1,λ,qj+1,...,qℓ)dq1...dqj−1dqj+1...dqℓ
+
dλ
=#
···#
qjf(q1,...,qj−1,qj,qj+1,...,qℓ)g(q1,...,qj−1,qj,qj+1,...,qℓ)dq1...dqj−1dqjdqj+1...dqℓ
= (Af, g)
We again recognize that the discrete spectrum and the old formulation of the
eigenvalue problem both must fail,since E(λ) increases continuously everywhere.
This example also indicates, more generally, a possible way to ﬁnd E(λ)
when the spectrum is continuous: one may determine (incorrectly!) the solutions
of Af = λf (since λ lies in the continuous spectrum, these f do not belong
to R∞!), and form their linear combinations for all λ ⩽λ0. These belong in
part to R∞again, and perhaps form a closed linear manifold Nλ0. Then we set
E(λ0) = PNλ0
If we have handled everything properly, it becomes possible on this basis to
verify S1– S3 (for A and these E(λ)), and so to transform the heuristic argument
into an exact one.85
The second example which we wish to consider is the other important
operator of wave mechanics, ℏ
i
∂
∂qj . In order to avoid unnecessary complications,
let ℓ= j = 1 (the treatment is the same for other values).
We must then
investigate the operator
A′f(q) = ℏ
i
∂
∂qf(q)
If the domain of q is −∞< q < +∞then this is a Hermitian operator, as we
saw in II.5. On the other hand, for a ﬁnite domain a ⩽q ⩽b this is not the
case:
(A′f, g) −(f, A′g) =
" b
a
ℏ
i f ′(q)g(q)dq −
" b
a
f(q) ℏ
i g ′(q)dq
= ℏ
i
" b
a
-
f ′(q)g(q) + f(q)g′(q)
.
dq
= ℏ
i
/
f(q)g(q)
0b
a
= ℏ
i
/
f(b)g(b) −f(a)g(a)
In order for this to vanish the domain of ℏ
i
∂
∂q must be limited in such a way
that for two f, g picked arbitrarily from it, f(a)g(a) = f(b)g(b). That is,
f(a) : f(b) = g(b) : g(a)
If we vary f for ﬁxed g then we see that f(a) : f(b) must be the same number
85 The exact formulation of this idea (to be considered here only as an
heuristic statement) is found in papers of Hellinger (J. f. Math. 136 (1909))
and Weyl (Math. Ann. 68 (1910)).


8. Initial Considerations
θ throughout the entire domain (θ may even be 0 or ∞). Substitutions f ↔g
give θ = 1/¯θ; i.e., |θ| = 1.
So in order for
ℏ
i
∂
∂q to be Hermitian we must
postulate a “boundary condition” of the form
f(a) : f(b) = θ
:
θ a ﬁxed number of unit absolute value
First we take the interval −∞< q < +∞. The solutions of Af = λf;
i.e., of ℏ
i φ′(q) = λφ(q), are the functions
φ(q) = ce(i/ℏ)λq
But these cannot be used for our purposes without further discussion, since
" +∞
−∞
|φ(q)|2dq =
" +∞
−∞
|c|2dq = ∞
(unless c = 0, φ ≡0).
We observe that in the ﬁrst example we found the
solution δ(q −λ); i.e., a ﬁctitious, non-existent function (see Note 84). Now we
ﬁnd
e(i/ℏ)λq
which is an entirely well-behaved function, but which does not belong to R∞
because of the unboundedness of the integral of the square of its absolute value.
For our point of view, these two facts have the same meaning, because for us
what does not belong to R∞does not exist.86
As in the ﬁrst case, we now form the linear combinations of the solutions
with λ ⩽λ0; i.e., the functions
f(q) =
" λ0
−∞
c(λ)e(i/ℏ)λqdq
It is to be hoped that among these, functions in R∞will be present, and
furthermore that these will form a closed linear manifold N′
λ0, and ﬁnally that
the projections
E(λ0) = PN ′
λ0
will form the resolution of the identity belonging to A′.
We obtain an example conﬁrming the ﬁrst surmise if we set
f(q) =
" λ0
λ1
e(i/ℏ)λqdq = e(i/ℏ)λ0q −e(i/ℏ)λ1q
(i/ℏ)q
c(λ) =
&
for
λ ⩾λ1
for
λ < λ1
:
λ1 < λ0
86 Of course, only success in the physical application can justify this point of
view or its use in quantum mechanics.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
because this f(q) is everywhere regular for ﬁnite values, while for q →±∞it
behaves like 1/q, so that
# +∞
−∞|f(q)|2dq is ﬁnite. But the other surmises also
prove to be correct, and actually follow from the theory of the Fourier integral.
Indeed, this theory asserts the following:87
Let f(x) be any function with ﬁnite
" +∞
−∞
|f(x)|2dx
Then the function
Lf(x) = F(y) =
√
2π
" +∞
−∞
eixyf(x)dx
can be formed, and for this
" +∞
−∞
|F(y)|2dy
is also ﬁnite, and is actually equal to
# +∞
−∞|f(x)|2dx. Moreover, LLf(x) = f(−x).
(This is the so -called Fourier transform which plays an important role elsewhere
in the theory of diﬀerential equations.)
If we replace x, y by
√
ℏq,
√
ℏp then we obtain the transform
Mf(q) = F(p) =
√
h
" +∞
−∞
e
i
ℏpqf(q)dq
which has the same properties. Consequently, it maps R∞on itself [Mf(q) = g(p)
is solvable for each g(p) of R∞: f(q) = Mg(−p)], leaves ∥f∥invariant, and is
linear. By II.5 this M is unitary. Therefore M2f(q) = f(−q): M –1f(q) = M∗f(q) =
Mf(−q) so M commutes with M2; i.e., with the operation f(q) →f(−q).
What we then had in mind for N′
λ0 was the following: f(q) belongs to N′
λ0
if F(p) = M –1f(p) is equal to zero for all p < λ0. (Here
F(p) =
√
hc(p)
where c(λ) was deﬁned above.) But these F(p), as we know, form a closed
linear manifold Nλ0. Therefore the image N′
λ0 of this Nλ0 obtained by M is
also a closed linear manifold. E′(λ0) is formed from E(λ0) just as was N′
λ0 from
Nλ0, by transformation of the entire R∞with M. Therefore E′(λ0) = ME(λ0)M –1.
Then E′(λ), as well as E(λ), has the properties S1 and S2. It still remains to
prove S3; i.e., that the resolution of the identity E(λ) belongs to A′.
In this, we limit ourselves to the demonstration of the following: If f(q) is
diﬀerentiable without special convergence diﬃculties, and if
" +∞
−∞
| ℏ
i f ′(q)|2dq
87 Plancherel, Circ. Math. di. Pal. 30 (1910); Titchmarsh, Lond. Math. Soc.
Proc. 22 (1924).


8. Initial Considerations
is ﬁnite, then
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E′(λ)f∥2
is ﬁnite, and88
(A′f, g) =
" +∞
−∞
λ d(E′(λ)f, g)
Indeed (recall that M –1f(p) = F(p))
A′f(q) = ℏ
i f ′(q)
= ℏ
i
∂
∂q(MF(p))
= ℏ
i
∂
∂q
'
√
h
"
F(p)e
i
ℏpqdp
(
=
√
h
"
F(p) · p · e
i
ℏpqdp
= M(pF(p))
Therefore, for the f mentioned, A′ = MAM –1 (here A is the operator q·, or—since
we use the variable p here—p·). Since the above propositions hold for A, E(λ)
they also are valid after the transformation of R∞with M. Therefore they also
hold for A = MAM –1 and E′(λ) = ME(λ)M –1.
The situation for
ℏ
i
∂
∂q in the interval a ⩽q ⩽b (a < b; a, b ﬁnite) is
essentially diﬀerent. In this case, as we know, a boundary condition
f(a) : f(b) = θ
:
|θ| = 1
is forced by the Hermiticity requirement. Again, ℏ
i
∂
∂qf(q) = λf(q) is solved by
f(q) = ce(i/ℏ)λq
but now
" b
a
|f(q)|2dq =
" b
a
|c|2dq = (b −a)|c|2
is ﬁnite, so that f(q) always belongs to R∞. On the other hand, there is the
boundary condition
f(a) : f(b) = e(i/ℏ)λ(b−a) = θ
to be satisﬁed, which, if we set θ = e−iα (0 ⩽α < 2π), becomes
2πi
h λ(a −b) = −i(α + 2πk)
:
k = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .
λ =
h
b −a
' α
2π + k
(
88 Regarding the following equation: E′(λ) does not belong to A′ = ℏ
i
∂
∂q itself,
but to an operator whose domain includes that of A′ and which coincides in
this domain with A′. See the developments regarding this in II.9.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Therefore we have a discrete spectrum, and the normalized solutions are then
determined by (b −a)|c|2 = 1 whence c = 1/
√
b −a:
φk(q) =
√
b −a e(i/ℏ)λq
=
√
b −a ei 2π
a−b
* α
2π +k
+
q
:
k = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .
This is then an orthonormal set, but it is also complete. For if f(q) is orthogonal
to φk(q) then
ei
α
b−aqf(q)
is orthogonal to all
ei 2π
b−akq
and therefore
ei α
2πxf
* b−a
2π x
+
is orthogonal to all eikx; i.e., to 1, cos x, sin x, cos 2x, sin 2x, . . . . Moreover, it is
deﬁned in the interval
a ⩽b −a
2π x ⩽b
whose length is 2π, so it must vanish according to well-known theorems.89
Therefore f(q) ≡0.
Consequently, we have a pure discrete spectrum, a case which we treated in
general at the beginning of this section. One should observe how the “boundary
condition”—i.e., θ or α—aﬀects the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions.
In conclusion, we can also consider the case of a one-way inﬁnite interval
(domain); say 0 ⩽q < +∞. First of all, we must again prove the Hermitian
nature of the operator. We have
(A′f, g) −(f, A′g) = ℏ
i
" b
a
-
f ′(q)g(q) + f(q)g′(q)
.
dq
= ℏ
i
/
f(q)g(q)
0∞
We argue that f(q)g(q) approaches zero as q →∞just as we did in II.5 in the
case of the (both ways) inﬁnite interval (domain). Therefore the requirement
has to be f(0)g(0) = 0. If we set f = g it can be seen that the “boundary
condition” is f(0) = 0.
In this case, serious diﬃculties present themselves.
The solutions of
A′φ = λφ are the same as in the interval −∞< q < +∞, namely the functions
φ(q) = ce(i/ℏ)λq
89 All Fourier coeﬃcients disappear, therefore the function itself vanishes
(see, for example, Courant-Hilbert in the reference given in Note 30).


8. Initial Considerations
but they do not belong to R∞and they do not satisfy the boundary condition.
The latter is suspicious. Nevertheless, it is rather surprising that we must by
the method sketched earlier necessarily obtain the same E(λ) as in the interval
−∞< q < +∞since the (improper; i.e., not belonging to R∞) solutions are
the same. How is this to be reconciled with the fact that the operator is a
diﬀerent one? Also, they are not what we need. For if we again deﬁne M, M –1 in
the Hilbert space FΩfunctions f(q) (0 ⩽q < +∞,
! ∞
|f(q)|2dq ﬁnite):
Mf(q) = F(p) =
√
h
" +∞
e
i
ℏpqf(q)dq
M
–1F(p) = f(q) =
√
h
" +∞
−∞
e−i
ℏpqF(p)dp = MF(−p)
then M maps the Hilbert space FΩ′ of all f(q) with
0 ⩽q < +∞,
" +∞
|f(q)|2dq ﬁnite
onto another Hilbert space FΩ′′ of all F(p) with
−∞⩽q < +∞,
" +∞
|F(p)|2dp ﬁnite
While ∥Mf(q)∥= ∥f(q)∥always holds (this follows from the theorems previously
mentioned if we set f(q) = 0 for −∞< q < 0), ∥M –1F(p)∥= ∥F(p)∥is not the
case in general because, by reason of the theorems previously discussed, if we
deﬁne f(q) for q < 0 by
f(q) =
√
h
" +∞
−∞
e−i
ℏpqF(p)dp
then
∥F∥2 =
" +∞
−∞
|F(p)|2dp =
" +∞
−∞
|f(q)|2dq
∥M
–1F∥2 = ∥f∥2 =
" +∞
|f(q)|2dq
So ∥M –1F∥< ∥F∥unless, by chance, f(q)—deﬁned as above—vanishes for all
q < 0. Therefore E′(λ) = ME(λ)M –1 is not a resolution of the identity:90 the
method has failed.
90 It is indeed true that M –1Mf(q) = f(q) (it suﬃces to deﬁne f(q) = 0 for
q < 0 and to make use of earlier theorems) but it is not always true that
M –1MF(p) = F(p) because in general ∥M –1F∥< ∥F∥, therefore ∥M –1 MF∥< ∥F∥.
Consequently M –1M = I, MM –1 ̸= I; i.e., M –1 is not a true reciprocal of M. (Also,
no other can exist because if there were one, then, since M –1 M = I, it would have
to be still equal to our M –1.) As a consequence of this, from E′(λ) = ME(λ)M –1
for example the conclusion E′2(λ) = E′(λ) can still be made (since only M –1 M is
involved), but E′(λ →+∞) −→MM –1 ̸= I.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
We shall soon see (in Note 105) that this lies in the nature of the case,
because no resolution of the identity belongs to this operator.
Before we conclude these introductory discussions we shall give a few formal
rules of calculation for operators, which are put in the symbolic form
A =
" +∞
−∞
λdE(λ)
by use of the resolution of the identity.
First, let F be a projection that commutes with E(λ). Then for all λ′ < λ′′
∥E(λ′′)Ff −E(λ′)Ff∥2 = ∥{E(λ′′) −E(λ′)}Ff∥2
= ∥F{E(λ′′) −E(λ′)}f∥2
⩽∥{E(λ′′) −E(λ′)}f∥2
Since
E(λ′′) ,
E(λ′)
and
E(λ′′) −E(λ′)
as well as
E(λ′′)F,
E(λ′)F
and
{E(λ′′) −E(λ′)}F
are projections, we have
∥E(λ′′)Ff∥2 −∥E(λ′)Ff∥2 ⩽∥E(λ′′)f∥2 −∥E(λ′)f∥2
Therefore
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2 ⩾
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E(λ)Ff∥2
Then, by S3, AFf is deﬁned if Af is. Furthermore,91
AF =
" +∞
−∞
λd(E(λ)F) =
" +∞
−∞
λd(FE(λ)) = FA
i.e., A and F also commute. In particular, we can take any of the projectors
91 Actually, this must be proved non-symbolically with the help of the rigorous
equation
(Af, g) =
"
λd(E(λ)f, g)
The calculation runs as follows:
(AFf, g) =
"
λd(E(λ)Ff, g) =
"
λd(FE(λ)f, g) =
"
λd(E(λ)f, Fg)
= (Af, Fg)
= (FAf, g)
From this it follows that AF ≡FA.


8. Initial Considerations
E(λ) for F (because of S3). Then
AE(λ) =
" +∞
−∞
λ′ d(E(λ′)E(λ)) =
" +∞
−∞
λ′ dE(Min(λ, λ′))
Splitting the integral (
! +∞
−∞=
! λ
−∞+
! +∞
λ
), we have
AE(λ) =
" λ
−∞
λ′ dE(λ′) +
" +∞
λ
λ′ dE(λ)
=
" λ
−∞
λ′ dE(λ′) + 0
= E(λ)A
because the function following the second diﬀerential is constant. In addition,
it follows from this that92
A2 =
" +∞
−∞
λd(E(λ)A) =
" +∞
−∞
λd
# " λ
−∞
λ′ dE(λ′)
$
=
" +∞
−∞
λ2dE(λ)
In general we have
An =
" +∞
−∞
λndE(λ)
because we can reason inductively from n −1 to n:92
An = An−1A =
" +∞
−∞
λn−1 d(E(λ)A) =
" +∞
−∞
λn−1 d
# " λ
−∞
λ′ dE(λ′)
$
=
" +∞
−∞
λn−1 · λdE(λ)
=
" +∞
−∞
λn dE(λ)
It now follows that if p(x) = a0 + a1x + · · · + anxn is any polynomial, then
p(A) =
" +∞
−∞
p(λ)dE(λ)
(By p(A) we mean, of course, p(x) = a0I + a1A + · · · + anAn.
! +∞
−∞dE(λ) = I
follows from S1.)
92 The third equality follows from the equation
"
f(λ)d
# " λ
g(λ′)dh(λ′)
$
=
"
f(λ)g(λ)dh(λ)
which is generally valid for the Stieltjes integral. This equation is clear without
further discussion, by reason of the reciprocal relation between d and
! λ. A
rigorous proof has been given by the author: Annals of Mathematics 32 (1931).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Furthermore, we have the following: If r(λ) and s(λ) are any two functions,
and if we deﬁne two operators B, C (symbolically) by93
B =
" +∞
−∞
r(λ) dE(λ),
C =
" +∞
−∞
s(λ) dE(λ)
then it follows that
BC =
" +∞
−∞
r(λ)s(λ) dE(λ)
For proof we proceed exactly as in the special case B = C = A:
BE(λ) =
" +∞
−∞
r(λ′)d(E(λ′)E(λ)) =
" +∞
−∞
r(λ′)d(E(Min(λ, λ′)))
=
" λ
−∞
r(λ′)dE(λ′) +
" +∞
λ
r(λ′)dE(λ)
=
" λ
−∞
r(λ′)dE(λ′)
CB =
" +∞
−∞
s(λ)d(BE(λ)) =
" +∞
−∞
s(λ)d
# " λ
−∞
r(λ′)dE(λ′)
$
=
" +∞
−∞
s(λ) · r(λ)dE(λ)
=
" +∞
−∞
s(λ)r(λ)dE(λ)
The following relations may easily be veriﬁed:
B∗=
" +∞
−∞
r(λ)dE(λ)
aB =
" +∞
−∞
ar(λ)dE(λ)
B ± C =
" +∞
−∞
{r(λ) ± s(λ)}dE(λ)
There then exists no formal obstacle to writing B = r(A) for such functions
r(λ).94 Particularly noteworthy are the (discontinuous!) functions
93 That is,
(Bf, g) =
" +∞
−∞
r(λ)d(E(λ), g),
(Cf, g) =
" +∞
−∞
s(λ)d(E(λ), g)
94 The precise foundation of this function concept was given by the author
in Annals of Math. 32 (1931). F. Riesz was the ﬁrst one to deﬁne general
operator functions by limiting processes applied to polynomials.


9. Digression
eλ(λ′) =
% 1
for
λ′ ⩽λ
for
λ′ > λ
For these we have (by S1)
eλ(A) =
" +∞
−∞
eλ(λ′)dE(λ) =
" λ
−∞
dE(λ′) = E(λ)
(At the beginning of this section we discussed the operator A = qj· . Its E(λ)
was multiplication by 1 or 0 according as qj ⩽λ or qj > λ; i.e., multiplication
by eλ(qj). This example is well suited to furnish an intuitive picture of the
above concepts.)
9. DIGRESSION ON THE EXISTENCE AND UNIQUENESS
OF THE SOLUTIONS OF THE EIGENVALUE PROBLEM
The last section gave only a qualitative survey, emphasizing special cases,
of the problem as to which resolutions of the identity E(λ) correspond to a given
Hermitian operator A. A systematic investigation of the question still remains
to be eﬀected. To do this in mathematical completeness goes beyond the scope
of this book. We limit ourselves to the proof of a few points, and the statement
of the rest—particularly since precise knowledge of these circumstances is not
absolutely necessary for understanding of quantum mechanics.95
In theorem 18 it was shown that the continuity of linear operators is
expressed by
Co
∥Af∥⩽C · ∥f∥
:
C arbitrary, but ﬁxed
but by theorem 18 there are several equivalent forms of the condition Co:
Co1
|(Af, g)| ⩽C · ∥f∥∥g∥
Co2
|(Af, f)| ⩽C · ∥f∥2
but only if A is Hermitian
The condition Co1, equivalent to continuity, is the Hilbert concept of
boundedness. Hilbert has formulated and solved the eigenvalue problem for
bounded (i.e., continuous) Hermitian operators (see Note 70). But before we
discuss this case we must introduce an additional concept.
A Hermitian operator A is said to be closed if it has the following property:
Given a point sequence f1, f2, . . ., assume that all Afn are deﬁned, and that
fn →f, Afn →f ∗. Then A is closed if and only if Af is also deﬁned, and is
95 The theory of unbounded Hermitian operators, to which reference will be
made in the following (in addition to the Hilbert theory of bounded operators),
was developed by the author (see reference in Note 78). M. Stone (PNAS 1929
and 1930) arrived at similar results independently.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
equal to f ∗. It should be observed that continuity could be deﬁned in a way
which is closely related to the above deﬁnition, namely the following: If all
Afn, Af are deﬁned and if fm →f, then Afn →Af. The diﬀerence between
the two deﬁnitions is that for closure one is required to have Afn →f ∗= Af,
while for continuity it is required only that Afn →f ∗(i.e., that f ∗exists).
A few examples: Let R∞again be the space of all f(q) with ﬁnite
" +∞
−∞
|f(q)|2dq
:
−∞< q < +∞
Let A be the operator q·, deﬁned for all f(q) with ﬁnite
" +∞
−∞
|f(q)|2dq
and
" +∞
−∞
q2|f(q)|2dq
And let A′ be the operator ℏ
i
∂
∂q deﬁned for all everywhere-diﬀerentiable functions
f(q) with ﬁnite
" +∞
−∞
|f(q)|2dq
and
" +∞
−∞
| ℏ
i f ′(q)|2dq
As we know, both of these operators are Hermitian.
A is shown to be closed by the following argument: Let fn →f, Afn →f ∗;
i.e.,
" +∞
−∞
|fn(q) −f(q)|2dq →0,
" +∞
−∞
|qfn(q) −f ∗(q)|2dq →0
By reason of the discussion in II.3 of the proof of D, there exists a subsequence
fn1, fn2, . . . of the f1, f2, . . . which converges to a limit everywhere with the
exception of a q-set of measure 0: fnν(q) →g(q). Therefore
" +∞
−∞
|g(q) −f(q)|2dq →0,
" +∞
−∞
|qg(q) −f ∗(q)|2dq →0
i.e., except for a set of measure 0, g(q) = f(q) and also qg(q) = f ∗(q); i.e.,
f ∗(q) and qf(q) are not essentially diﬀerent. But, since f ∗(q) belongs to R∞
by assumption, qg(q) does also. Consequently Af(q) is deﬁned and is equal to
qf(q) = f ∗(q).
On the other hand, A′ is not closed: Set
fn(q) = e−√
q2+ 1n ,
f(q) = e−|q|
Clearly, all A′fn are deﬁned, but not A′f (f has no derivative at q = 0).
Nevertheless, fn →f, A′fn →f ∗, as can easily be calculated if we set
f ∗(q) = −sgn(q)e−|q|
where
sgn(q) =
& −1
for
q < 0
for
q = 0
+1
for
q > 0


9. Digression
We now show that—in contrast to continuity—closure is a property which
can always be achieved with little diﬃculty for Hermitian operators. This is
done by the process of extension; i.e., we leave the operator unchanged at all
points of R∞where it is deﬁned, but in addition deﬁne it for some of those
points where it was not previously deﬁned.
Indeed, let A be an arbitrary Hermitian operator. We deﬁne an operator
A∼as follows: A∼f is deﬁned if a sequence f1, f2, . . . with deﬁned Afn exists in
such a way that f is the limit of the fn and the Afn also possess a limit f ∗.
Then A∼f = f ∗. This deﬁnition is admissible only if it is unique; i.e., it follows
from fn →f, gn →f, Afn →f ∗, Agn →g∗that f ∗= g∗. But if Ag is deﬁned
(f ∗, g) = lim(Afn, g) = lim(fn, Ag) = (f, Ag)
(g∗, g) = lim(Agn, g) = lim(gn, Ag) = (f, Ag)
therefore (f ∗, g)=(g∗, g). Butthese g are everywhere dense, so f ∗=g∗. Therefore
we have deﬁned A∼correctly. This A∼is an extension of A; i.e., whenever A is
deﬁned then A∼is also deﬁned, and A∼= A. From the fact that A is linear and
Hermitian the same follows for A∼(by continuity). Finally, A∼is closed, by the
following argument: Let all A∼f be deﬁned; fn →f, A∼fn →f ∗. Then there are
sequences fn,1, fn,2, . . . with deﬁned Afn,m such that fn,m →fn, Afn,m →f ∗
n
and A∼fn = f ∗
n. For each such n there is an Nn such that for m ⩾Nn
∥fn,m −fn∥⩽1n,
∥Afn,m −f ∗
n∥⩽1n
Thereforefn,Nn−fn →0, Afn,Nn−A∼f →0 whence fn,Nn−f →0, Afn,Nn−f ∗→0.
From this it follows by deﬁnition that A∼f = f ∗.
(It should be noted that a discontinuous operator can never be made
continuous by extension.)
If an operator B extends an operator A —i.e., if, whenever Af is deﬁned,
Bf is also deﬁned and Bf = Af—we write B ≻A or A ≺B. We have just
proved that A ≺A∼, and that A∼is Hermitian and closed. It is evident without
further discussion that for each closed B with A ≺B, A∼≺B must also hold.
Consequently, A∼is the smallest closed extension of A. (Therefore A∼
∼= A∼.)
The close relation between A and A∼makes it plain that A may be replaced
by A∼in all considerations, since A∼extends the domain of A in a natural way
or, looking at it from the opposite point of view, A restricts the domain of A∼
in an unnecessary manner. Let this replacement of A by A∼take place. Then,
as a consequence, we may assume that all Hermitian operators with which we
have to deal are closed.
Let us again consider a continuous Hermitian operator A. In this case,
closure is equivalent to closure of the domain. Now the condition ∥Af∥⩽C·∥f∥,
characteristic for continuity, clearly holds for A∼also.
Therefore A∼is also
continuous. Since the domain of A∼is then closed, but is on the other hand


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
everywhere dense, it is equal to R∞. That is: A∼is deﬁned everywhere, and
consequently each closed and continuous operator is also. The converse holds
too: if a closed operator is deﬁned everywhere, then it is continuous (this is the
theorem of Toeplitz,96 into the proof of which we do not enter here.)
Hilbert’s result runs as follows:
To each continuous operator there
corresponds one and only one resolution of the identity (see the reference in
Note 70). Since a continuous operator is always deﬁned, and
"
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2
and must always be ﬁnite; since, in addition, this equals∥Af∥2 and consequently,
by Co, is ⩽C2∥f∥2, we have
0 ⩾∥Af∥2 −C2∥f∥2 =
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2 −C2
" +∞
−∞
d∥E(λ)f∥2
=
" +∞
−∞
(λ2 −C2)d∥E(λ)f∥2
Now let f = E(−C −ϵ)g. Then E(λ)f = E(Min(λ, −C −ϵ))g, and therefore for
λ ⩾−C −ϵ it is constant, so that we need only consider
! −C−ϵ
−∞
. In this case,
E(λ)f = E(λ)g and
λ2 −C2 ⩾(C + ϵ)2 −C2 > 2Cϵ
so that
0 ⩾2Cϵ
" −C−ϵ
−∞
d∥E(λ)g∥2 = 2Cϵ∥E(−C −ϵ)g∥2
∥E(−C −ϵ)g∥2 ⩽0,
E(−C −ϵ)g = 0
In the same way, it may be shown for f = g −E(C + ϵ)g that
g −E(C + ϵ)g = 0
Consequently, for all ϵ > 0, E(−C −ϵ) = O, E(C + ϵ) = I; i.e.,
E(λ) =
% O
for
λ < −C
I
for
λ < +C
(Because of S2 the latter holds also for λ = 0.) That is, E(λ) is variable only
on the range −C ⩽λ ⩽+C.
Conversely, this has the continuity of A as a consequence: we have
∥Af∥2 =
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2 =
" +C
−C
λ2d∥E(λ)f∥2
⩽C2
" +C
−C
d∥E(λ)f∥2 = C2
" +∞
−∞
d∥E(λ)f∥2 = C2∥f∥2
which gives ∥Af∥⩽C∥f∥. We see therefore that the continuous A are entirely
96 Math. Ann. 69 (1911).


9. Digression
exhausted by resolutions of the identity variable only in a ﬁnite λ-interval. But
what is the situation with the other, discontinuous Hermitian operators? There
are still available all resolutions of the identity for which the λ-interval is not
ﬁnite. Do these exhaust the Hermitian operators just mentioned?
The circumstances under which these operators cannot be deﬁned
everywhere must ﬁrst be assessed correctly.
It is perfectly possible that a Hermitian operator may not be deﬁned at
points in Hilbert space at which deﬁnition might actually be feasible.
For
example, our operator A′ = ℏ
i
∂
∂q was undeﬁned for f(q) = e−|q| but could have
been limited to analytic functions (in −∞< q < +∞, q real),97 etc.
The
domain was protected from entirely arbitrary contractions by the fact that we
required it to be everywhere dense. Furthermore, we can restrict ourselves to
closed operators.
Still, even this is not suﬃciently eﬀective.
Indeed, let us
take, for example, the operator A′ = ℏ
i
∂
∂q in the interval 0 ⩽q ⩽1. Then let
f(q) be assumed diﬀerentiable everywhere, with
! +∞
−∞|f(q)|2dq,
! +∞
−∞|f ′(q)|2dq
ﬁnite. In order that A′ be Hermitian a boundary condition f(0) : f(1) = e−iα
(0 ⩽α < 2π) must be imposed; let the set of these f(q) be Aα, with A′ itself
—thus restricted—becoming A′
α. Furthermore, let us consider the boundary
condition f(0) = f(1) = 0. We call this f(q)-set A0 and the A′, restricted
accordingly, A′0. All A∼
α
′ are extensions of A∼′0, which is then Hermitian, and its
domain is everywhere dense,98 and therefore the closed A∼
α
′ are also extensions
of A∼′0. All are diﬀerent from one another, and from A∼′0. Indeed, the clearly
97 Even the functions f(q) which are analytic in −∞< q < +∞(with ﬁnite
! +∞
−∞|f(q)|2dq,
! +∞
−∞|f ′(q)|2dq, . . .) are everywhere dense in R∞. Indeed, by II.3
D, the linear combinations of
fa,b(q) =
% 1
for
a < q < b
elsewhere
are everywhere dense. Therefore it suﬃces to approximate these arbitrarily well
by analytic functions f(q). Such, for example, as
f (ϵ)
a,b(q) = 1
2 −1
2 tanh
'(q −a)(q −b)
ϵ
(
=
#
1 + exp
'
2(q −a)(q −b)
ϵ
($−1
which is of the desired type, and converges to fa,b(q) as ϵ →0.
98 It is again suﬃcient to approximate the fa,b(q), 0 ⩽a < b ⩽1 with
functions from A0. For example, the functions
f (ϵ)
a,b(q) = 1
2 −1
2 tanh
'
ϵ
–1 (q −a −ϵ)(q −b + ϵ)
q(1 −q)
(
with ϵ →0 can be used for this purpose.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
unitary operation f(q) →eiβqf(q) transforms A′ into A′ + ℏβ I and
Aα
into
Aα+β
A0
into
A0
∴
A′
α
into
A′
α−β + ℏβ I
A′0
into
A′0 + ℏβ I
∴
A∼
α
′
into
A∼
α+β
′
+ ℏβ I
A∼′0
into
A∼′0 + ℏβ I
Hence it would follow from A∼
α
′ = A∼′0 that A∼
α−β
′
= A∼′0; i.e., all A∼
γ
′ would be
equal to one another. Consequently it suﬃces to show that A∼
α
′ ̸= A∼
γ
′ if α ̸= γ,
and this is certainly the case if A∼
α
′ , A∼
γ
′ possess no common Hermitian extension;
i.e., if A′ is not Hermitian in the union of Aα, Aγ. Since eiαq belongs to Aα,
eiγ q to Aγ, and
(A′eiαq, eiγq) −(eiαq, A′eiγq) = iα
" 1
ei(α−γ)q dq −iγ
" 1
ei(α−γ)q dq
= i(α −γ)
" 1
ei(α−γ)q dq
= ei(α−γ) −1
̸= 0
this is indeed the case.
Consequently the closed Hermitian operator A∼′0 is
deﬁned in too restricted a region, because there exist proper (i.e., diﬀerent
from A∼′0 ) closed Hermitian extensions of it: A∼
α
′ —and therefore the extension
process—is inﬁnitely many valued, since each A∼
α
′ can be used and each produces
another solution of the eigenvalue problem.
(It is always a pure discrete
spectrum, but depends upon α: λk = h
) α
2π + k
*
, k = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .) On the
other hand, with the operator A∼′0 itself we in general expect no reasonable
solutions of the eigenvalue problem. In fact we shall show in the course of this
section that a Hermitian operator which belongs to a resolution of the identity
(i.e., has a solvable eigenvalue problem) possesses no proper extensions. An
operator which possesses no proper extensions—which is already deﬁned at all
points where it could be deﬁned in a reasonable fashion (i.e., without violation
of its Hermitian nature)—we call a maximal operator. Then, by the above,
resolutions of the identity can belong only to maximal operators.
On the other hand, the following theorem holds: Each Hermitian operator
can be extended to a maximal Hermitian operator. (In fact, a non-maximal
but closed operator may always be extended in an inﬁnite number of diﬀerent
ways. The only unique step of the extension process is the closure A →A∼.
See Note 95.) Therefore the most generally valid solution of the problem which
we can expect is this: to each maximal Hermitian operator belongs one and


9. Digression
only one resolution of the identity (each closed continuous operator is deﬁned
everywhere in R∞and is therefore maximal).
Therefore it is necessary to answer these questions: Does a resolution of
the identity belong to a maximal Hermitian operator? Can it ever happen that
several belong to the same operator?
We begin by stating the answers: to a given maximal Hermitian operator
there belongs none or exactly one resolution of the identity, and the former
situation does sometimes occur; i.e., the eigenvalue problem is certainly unique,
but under certain conditions it is insolvable. Nevertheless, the latter case is to
be regarded in a certain sense as an exception. The argument which leads to
this conclusion will now be sketched in broad outline.
If we consider a rational function f(λ) of a matrix A (of ﬁnite dimensions,
and capable of transformation to diagonal form by a unitary transformation),
then the eigenvectors are preserved, and the eigenvalues λ1, . . . , λn go over into
f(λ1), . . . , f(λn).99 If now the f(λ) maps the real axis (in the complex plane)
onto the circumference of the unit circle, then the matrices with exclusively
real eigenvalues go over into those with eigenvalues of absolute value 1; i.e.,
the Hermitian go over into the unitary.100 For example, f(λ) = λ−1
λ+1 has this
property. The corresponding transformation
U = A −i I
A + i I,
A = −i U + I
U −I
is known as the Cayley transformation. We shall now look to the eﬀect of this
transformation for the Hermitian operators of R∞; i.e., we deﬁne an operator
U as follows: Uf is deﬁned if and only if f = (A + i I)φ = Aφ + iφ, and
then Uf = (A −iI)φ = Aφ −iφ. We hope that this deﬁnition will yield a
single-valued Uf for all f, and that U will be unitary. The proof in Rn is not
relevant now, since it presumes the transformability to diagonal form; i.e., the
solvability of the eigenvalue problem, in fact with a pure discrete spectrum. But
if the statements about U prove to be correct, then we can solve the eigenvalue
problem in the following way:
99 Since the function f(λ) can be approximated by polynomials, it suﬃces to
consider polynomials, and therefore their components, simple powers: f(λ) = λs
(s = 0, 1, 2, . . .).
Since a unitary transformation does not matter here, we
may assume A to be a diagonal matrix. Since the diagonal elements are the
eigenvalues, they are λ1, λ2, . . . , λn. We must then show only that As is also
diagonal, and that it has the diagonal elements λs
1, λs
2, . . . , λs
n.
But this is
obvious.
100 To demonstrate that these properties are characteristic of Hermitian and
unitary matrices respectively, we again need only to verify them for diagonal
matrices. For the diagonal matrix A with elements λ1, . . . , λn, the diagonal
matrix A∗with elements ¯λ1, . . . , ¯λn is the transposed conjugate; therefore
A = A∗implies that λ1 = ¯λ1, . . . , λn = ¯λ1; i.e., that λ1, . . . , λn are real.
Moreover, A A∗= A∗A = I implies that λ1¯λ1 = 1, . . . , λn¯λn = 1; that is, that
|λ1| = |λ2| = · · · = |λn| = 1.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
For U, the eigenvalue problem is solvable in the following form: There is
a unique family of projectors E(σ) (0 ⩽σ ⩽1) which satisﬁes the following
conditions:
S1: E(0) = O, E(1) = I and for σ →σ0, σ ⩾σ0, E(σ)f →E(σ0)f.
S2: From σ ′ ⩽σ ′′ it follows that E(σ ′) ⩽E(σ ′′).
S3: It is always true that
(Uf, g) =
" 1
e2πiσd(E(σ)f, g)
(U is deﬁned everywhere, and the integral on the right is always
absolutely convergent.101)
This is proved in the framework and with the methods of the Hilbert
theory. This is made possible by the fact that the unitary operator U is always
continuous (see references in Notes 70, 101). The analogy to the conditions
S1– S3 for Hermitian operators comes to mind.
The only diﬀerences are:
instead of the real integrands λ (−∞< λ < +∞) the complex integrand
e2πiσ here is taken around the circumference of the unit circle (even in Rn the
Hermitian-unitary relation possesses a far-reaching analogy to the real axis-unit
circle relation: see Note 100), and the description of the operator domain in S3
is superﬂuous because unitary operators are deﬁned everywhere.
Because of S1, E(σ)f →E(0)f = 0 for σ →0 (since σ ⩾0 by its nature),
while for σ →1 (since σ ⩽1) there need not be E(σ)f →E(1)f = f. If this is
actually not the case, then E(σ) is discontinuous at σ = 1. But since a projection
E′ exists, such that for σ →1, σ < 1, E(σ)f →E′f (see theorem 17
in II.4, as well as Note 79), this means that E′ ̸= E(1) = I; i.e., that E′f = 0
also possesses solutions f ̸= 0. Because of E(σ) ⩽E′ it follows from E′f = 0
101 For the proof of this fact, see the work of the author cited in Note 78;
also A. Wintner: Math. Z. 30 (1929). The absolute convergence of all integrals
" 1
f(σ) d(E(σ)f, g)
with bounded f(σ) is shown as follows. It is suﬃcient to consider Re(E(σ)f, g)
since substitution of if, g for f, g changes this into Im(E(σ)f, g). Because
Re(E(σ)f, g) =
)
E(σ) f+g
2 , f+g
*
−
)
E(σ) f−g
2 , f−g
*
only the (E(σ)f, g) need be investigated. In
! 1
0 f(σ) d(E(σ)f, g) the integrand is
bounded and the σ-function behind the diﬀerential sign is monotonic; therefore
the proposition is demonstrated.


9. Digression
that E(σ)f = 0 for all σ < 1. Conversely, by the deﬁnition of E′, the former is
also a consequence of the latter. If all E(σ)f = 0 (σ < 1), then we see—just
as at the beginning of II.8—that (Uf, g) = (f, g) for all g, therefore Uf = f.
Conversely, if Uf = f then
" 1
e2πiσd(E(σ)f, f) = (Uf, f) = (f, f)
Re
" 1
e2πiσd(E(σ)f, f) = (f, f)
" 1
(1 −cos 2πσ)d(E(σ)f, f) = 0
" 1
(1 −cos 2πσ)d(∥E(σ)f∥2) = 0
From this we get—exactly as at the beginning of II.8—E(σ)f = 0 for all σ < 1
(and σ ⩾0). Consequently, the discontinuity of E(σ) at σ = 1 means that
Uf = f is solvable with f ̸= 0.
With our Cayley transforms U we now have φ = Af + if, Uφ = Af −if
and from Uφ = 0 it then follows that f = 0, φ = 0. Here E(σ) →f must also
hold for σ →1. Consequently, by the mapping
λ = −i e2πiσ + 1
e2πiσ −1 = −cot πσ,
σ = −1
π cot
–1 λ
(which maps the intervals 0 < σ < 1 and −∞< λ < +∞one-to-one and
monotonically onto each other) we can produce a resolution of the identity
F(λ) from E(σ) in the sense of S1– S2:
C
F(λ) = E(−1
π cot–1 λ),
E(σ) = F(−cot πσ)
We now want to show that F(λ) satisﬁes S3 for A if and only if E(σ) satisﬁes
S3 for U. In this way, the questions of the existence and uniqueness for the
solutions of the eigenvalue problem for the (possibly discontinuous) Hermitian
operator A are reduced to the corresponding questions for the unitary operator
U. These, however, as has been described, are answered in the most favorable
way.
Therefore, let A be Hermitian and U be its Cayley transform. We look ﬁrst
to the case in which U is unitary. Its E(σ) must then conform to S1, S2 as well
as to S3. We form the F(λ) according to C, and then S1, S2 are fulﬁlled. If Af
is deﬁned, then
Af + if = φ,
Af −if = Uφ
and therefore
f = φ −Uφ
2i
,
Af = φ + Uφ


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
We calculate, in part symbolically:102
f = φ −Uφ
2i
= 1
2i
#
φ −
" 1
e2πiσdE(σ) φ
$
=
" 1
1 −e2πiσ
2i
dE(σ) φ
E(σ)f =
" 1
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
d(E(σ)E(σ ′) φ)
=
" 1
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
d(E(Min(σ, σ ′)) φ) =
" σ
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
dE(σ ′) φ
∥E(σ)f∥2 = (E(σ)f, f) =
" σ
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
d(E(σ ′) φ, f)
=
" σ
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
d(E(σ ′) f, φ)
=
" σ
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
d
# " σ ′
1 −e−2πiσ ′′
−2i
d(E(σ ′′) φ, φ)
$
=
" σ
1 −e2πiσ ′
2i
1 −e−2πiσ ′
−2i
d(E(σ ′) φ, φ)
=
" σ
(1 −e2πiσ ′)(1 −e−2πiσ ′)
d∥E(σ ′)φ∥2
=
" σ
sin2(πσ ′) d∥E(σ ′)φ∥2
Therefore the integral given in S3 is
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥F(λ)f∥2 =
" 1
cot2(πσ) d∥E(σ)f∥2
=
" 1
cot2(πσ) d
# " σ
sin2(πσ ′) d∥E(σ ′)φ∥2$
=
" 1
cot2(πσ) sin2(πσ ′) d∥E(σ ′)φ∥2
=
" 1
cos2(πσ) d∥E(σ)φ∥2
But since this is dominated absolutely by
" 1
d∥E(σ)φ∥2 = ∥φ∥2
102 We apply the Stieltjes integral to the elements of R∞instead of to numbers.
All our relations are to be understood to hold if we choose any ﬁxed g from
R∞and form (•f, g), where f can be any element of R∞and • represents
an operator.
In contrast to the operator-Stieltjes integrals in II.7, this is a
half-symbolic process; instead of one g from R∞, there two elements f, g were
to be chosen arbitrarily from R∞, and instead of (•, g), there (•f, g) was to be
formed.


9. Digression
the result is ﬁnite. Furthermore,
Af = φ + Uφ
= 1
#
φ +
" 1
e2πiσdE(σ) φ
$
=
" 1
1 + e2πiσ
dE(σ) φ
=
" 1
i 1 + e2πiσ
1 −e2πiσ · 1 −e2πiσ
2i
dE(σ) φ
= −
" 1
cot(πσ) d
# " 1
1 −e2πiσ′
2i
dE(σ ′) φ
$
= −
" 1
cot(πσ) d(E(σ)f)
=
" +∞
−∞
λ d(E(σ)f)
i.e., the ﬁnal relation S3 also holds. Consequently, A is in any case an extension
of that operator which, by S3, belongs to F(λ). But since this is maximal (as
we shall show), A must be equal to it.103
We now discuss the converse.
Let F(λ) belong to A by S1– S3.
What
about U? We ﬁrst deﬁne E(σ) by C. It therefore satisﬁes S1, S2. Let φ be
arbitrary. We write (again symbolically)
f =
" +∞
−∞
λ + i dF(λ)φ =
" 1
−cot(πσ) + i dE(σ)φ
=
" 1
1 −e2πiσ
2i
dE(σ)φ
where, since
λ+i or 1−e2πiσ
2i
is bounded, all integrals converge. Then
103 There is an implied assumption here that there actually exists such an
operator for each given resolution of the identity F(λ). That is, for ﬁnite
" +∞
−∞
λ2d∥F(λ)f∥2
it is assumed than an f ∗can be found such that for all g
(f ∗, g) =
" +∞
−∞
λ d(F(λ)f, g)
and also that the f ∗with this property is everywhere dense. (The Hermitian
character of the operator thus deﬁned follows from S3: We exchange f, g in the
ﬁnal equation and take the complex conjugate.) Both of these propositions are
proved in the reference given in Note 78.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
F(λ)f = E(σ)f =
" 1
1 −e2πiσ′
2i
d(E(σ)E(σ ′)φ)
=
" 1
1 −e2πiσ′
2i
d(E(Min(σ, σ ′))φ)
=
" σ
1 −e2πiσ′
2i
dE(σ ′)φ
Af =
" +∞
−∞
λ dF(λ)f
= −
" 1
cot(πσ) dE(σ)f
=
" 1
i 1 + e2πiσ
1 −e2πiσ d
# " σ
1 −e2πiσ′
2i
dE(σ ′)φ
$
=
" 1
i 1 + e2πiσ
1 −e2πiσ
1 −e2πiσ
2i
dE(σ)φ
=
" 1
1 + e2πiσ
dE(σ)φ
Therefore
Af + if =
" 1
dE(σ)φ = φ
Af −if =
" 1
e2πiσdE(σ)φ
So Uφ is deﬁned and is equal to
! 1
0 e2πiσdE(σ)φ. Since φ was arbitrary, U is
deﬁned everywhere. When we form the inner product with any ψ and take the
complex conjugate, we see that U∗ψ =
! 1
0 e−2πiσdE(σ)ψ. The ﬁnal calculation
of II.8 then shows that UU∗= U∗U = I; i.e., U is unitary and belongs to E(σ).
The solvability of the eigenvalue problem of A is then equivalent to the
unitary nature of its Cayley transform U, and its uniqueness is established. The
only questions remaining are: Can we always form U, and if so, is it unitary?
To decide these questions, we begin again with a closed Hermitian operator A.
U was deﬁned as follows: If φ = Af + if, and only then, Uφ is deﬁned and
is equal to Af −if. But ﬁrst it must be shown that this deﬁnition is admissible
in general; i.e., that several f cannot exist for one φ. That is, that it follows
from Af + if = Ag + ig that f = g or—because of the linearity of A—that
f = 0 follows from Af + if = 0.
We have
∥Af ± if∥2 = (Af ± if, Af ± if)
= (Af, Af) ± (if, Af) ± (Af, if) + (if, if)
= ∥Af∥2 ± i(Af, f) ∓i(Af, f) + ∥f∥2
= ∥Af∥2 + ∥f∥2


9. Digression
Hence Af + if = 0 has ∥f∥2 ⩽∥Af + if∥2 = 0, f = 0 as a consequence, and
therefore our mode of deﬁnition is justiﬁed. Second, ∥Af −if∥= ∥Af +if∥; i.e.,
∥Uf∥= ∥φ∥. Therefore U is continuous insofar as it is deﬁned. Furthermore,
let E be the domain of U (the set of all Af +if) and F the range of U (the set of
all Uφ, therefore the set of all Af −if). Since A and U are linear, E and F are
linear manifolds, but they are also closed. Indeed, let φ be a limit point of E
or F respectively. Then there is a sequence φ1, φ2, . . . from E or F respectively,
with φn →φ. Hence φn = Afn ± ifn. Since the φn converge they satisfy the
Cauchy convergence criterion (see D in II.1), and because
∥fm −fn∥2 ⩽∥A(fm −fn) ± i(fm −fn)∥2 = ∥φm −φn∥2
the fn certainly satisfy this condition, and since
∥Afm −Afn∥2 = ∥A(fm −fn)∥2
⩽∥A(fm −fn) ± i(fm −fn)∥2 = ∥φm −φn∥2
the Afn do also. Therefore the f1, f2, . . . and the Af1, Af2, . . . (by D in II.1)
converge: fn →f, Afn →f ∗. Since A is closed, Af is deﬁned and is equal to f ∗.
Consequently we have
φn = Afn ± ifn →f ∗± if = Af ± if,
φn →φ
Therefore φ = Af ± if; i.e., φ also belongs to E or F, respectively.
Therefore U is deﬁned in the closed linear manifold E, and maps this onto
the closed linear manifold F. U is linear, and because
∥Uf −Ug∥= ∥U(f −g)∥= ∥f −g∥
it leaves all distances invariant. We then say that it is isometric. Consequently
Uf ̸= Ug follows from f ̸= g; i.e., the mapping is one-to-one. It is also true
that (f, g) = (Uf, Ug), which we prove just as the analogous relation was proved
in II.5. Therefore U leaves all inner products invariant. But U is clearly unitary
if and only if E = F = R∞.
If A, B are two closed Hermitian operators; U, V their Cayley transforms;
and E, F and G, H their respective domains and ranges, then we see
immediately that if B is a proper extension of A then V is also a proper
extension of U. Therefore E is a proper subset of G and F a proper subset of H.
Consequently, E ̸= R∞and F ̸= R∞. Then U is not unitary, and the eigenvalue
problem of A is unsolvable. Thus have we proved the theorem repeatedly cited
before: If the eigenvalue problem of A is solvable, then there are no proper
extensions of A; i.e., A is maximal.
Let us now look again to the closed Hermitian operator A and its E, F, U.
If Af is deﬁned then, for Af +if = φ, Uf is deﬁned and Af −if = Uφ; therefore
f =
2i(φ −Uφ), Af = 1
2(φ + Uφ) and if we set ψ =
2iφ we have f = ψ −Uψ,
Af = i(ψ + Uψ). Conversely, for f = ψ −Uψ, Af is certainly deﬁned; because,


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
since Uψ is deﬁned, ψ = Af ′ + if ′ (Af ′ deﬁned!) and Uψ = Af ′ −if ′ give
f = ψ −Uψ = 2if ′.
The domain of A is then the set of all ψ −Uψ, and
for f = ψ −Uψ we have Af = i(ψ + Uψ). Consequently, A is also uniquely
determined by U (as also are E, F). Simultaneously we see that the ψ −Uψ
must be everywhere dense (as the domain of A).
Conversely, we start out now from two closed linear manifolds E, F and
a linear isometric mapping U of E onto F. Is there a Hermitian operator A
whose Cayley transform is this U? Since it is necessary that the ψ −Uψ be
everywhere dense, this also will be assumed. The A in question is then uniquely
determined by the foregoing, except that the question again presents itself as
to whether this deﬁnition is possible; whether this A is really Hermitian, and
whether U actually is its Cayley transform. The ﬁrst is quite certainly correct
if f determines the φ (whenever this in general exists) in f = φ −Uφ uniquely;
i.e., if φ = ψ follows from φ −Uφ = ψ −Uψ, or φ = 0 from φ −Uφ = 0. But
let us suppose that φ −Uφ = 0. Then it follows from g = ψ −Uψ that
(φ, g) =
(φ, ψ)
−(φ, Uψ)
= (Uφ, Uψ) −(φ, Uψ) = (Uφ −φ, Uψ) = 0
and since these g are everywhere dense, φ = 0.
Second, we must prove (Af, g) = (f, Ag); i.e., that (Af, g) goes over into its
complex conjugate upon the exchange of f and g. Let f = φ−Uφ, g = ψ −Uψ.
Then Af = i(φ + Uφ) and
(Af, g) = (i(φ + Uφ), ψ −Uψ)
= i(φ, ψ) + i(Uφ, ψ) −i(φ, Uψ) −i(Uφ.Uψ)
= i
!
(Uφ, ψ) −(Uφ, ψ)
"
= i(Uφ, ψ) + i(Uφ, ψ)
which accomplishes what is desired of the exchange f ↔g (i.e., of φ ↔ψ).
The answer to the third question is seen in the following way: Let the Cayley
transform of A be called V. Its domain is the set of all
Af + if = i(φ + Uφ) + i(φ −Uφ) = 2iφ
i.e., the domain of U, and in this domain
V(2iφ) = V(Af + if) = Af −if = i(φ + Uφ) −i(φ −Uφ) = 2iUφ
i.e., Vφ = Uφ. Therefore V = U.
The (closed) Hermitian operators therefore correspond to our linear
isometric U, with everywhere dense φ −Uφ, in a one-to -one correspondence, if
we associate with each A its Cayley transform U.104 We can now characterize
104 In order that the eigenvalue problem of A always be solvable, the unitary
character of U (i.e., E = F = Rn or R∞) must follow from this. This is not


9. Digression
all Hermitian extensions B of A, since all isometric extensions V of U can be
found without diﬃculty (the φ −Vφ are automatically everywhere dense since
the φ −Uφ, which are a subset of the former, are everywhere dense). In order
that A be maximal, U must be also, and conversely. If U is not maximal. then
E ̸= R∞, F ̸= R∞. These inequalities in turn imply that U is not maximal;
indeed, then R∞−E ̸= 0, R∞−F ̸= 0. We can therefore select a φ0 from
R∞−E and a ψ0 from R∞−F with φ0 ̸= 0, ψ0 ̸= 0, and if we replace these
with
φ0
∥φ0∥,
ψ0
∥ψ0∥
we even have ∥φ0∥= ∥ψ0∥= 1. We now deﬁne an operator V in [E, φ0] such
that for f = φ + aφ0 (φ from E, a a complex number) Vf = Uφ + aψ0. V is
clearly linear. And since φ is orthogonal to φ0 and Uφ to ψ0 we have
∥f∥2 = ∥φ∥2 + |a|2,
∥Vf∥2 = ∥Uφ∥2 + |a|2
Therefore ∥Vf∥= ∥f∥and V is isometric. Finally, V is a proper extension of
U. Consequently it is characteristic for the maximal nature of A that E = R∞
or F = R∞.
If, on the other hand, A is not maximal, then the closed linear manifolds
R∞−E and R∞−F are both non-empty. Let the orthonormal sets spanning
them be φ1, φ2, . . . , φp and ψ1, ψ2 . . . , ψq respectively (see theorem 9, II.2; here
p = 1, 2, . . . , ∞; q = 1, 2, . . . , ∞; the φ series does not terminate if p = ∞;
similarly for the ψ series). Letting r = Min(p, q), we use the ﬁrst of the following
equations to construct f and the second to deﬁne a V in [E, φ1, . . . , φr]:
f =
φ +
r
#
ν=1
aνφν
:
φ from E; a1, . . . , ar numbers
Vf = Uφ +
r
#
ν=1
aνψν
It can easily be seen that V is linear and isometric, and is moreover a proper
extension of U. Its domain is [E, φ1, . . . , φr], therefore for r = p it is equal to
[E, R∞−E] = R∞; its range is [F, ψ1, . . . , ψr], therefore for r = q it is equal
to [F, R∞−F] = R∞. One of the two is certainly equal to R∞. Let V be the
Cayley transform of the Hermitian operator B. According to the discussion,
B is the maximal extension of A. We may observe that the φ and ψ can be
chosen in an inﬁnite number of ways (for example, we can replace ψ1 by any
θψ1, |θ| = 1), and so also, therefore, can V and B be.
the case in R∞as we deduced from the existence of non-maximal A. In Rn,
on the other hand, this must be the case. This can also be seen directly: since
each linear manifold of Rn is closed, that of the φ −Uφ is also, and since it is
everywhere dense, it is just Rn itself. F, the set of the φ, has no fewer dimensions
than its linear image, the set of the φ−Uφ; i.e., the maximal dimension number
n. This latter must hold also for F as a linear one-to-one image of E. But for
ﬁnite n it follows from this that E = F = Rn.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Thus has our examination been brought to its conclusion, with the following
result: If it is solvable, then it has only one solution, but for non-maximal
operators it is certainly not solvable. Non-maximal operators can always be
extended in an inﬁnite number of ways to maximal ones (we are discussing
Hermitian operators throughout). But the maximality condition is not exactly
the same as the solvability condition for the eigenvalue problem. The former is
equivalent to E = R∞or F = R∞, the latter to E = R∞and F = R∞.
We do not wish to investigate in any greater detail those operators for
which the former but not the latter is the case. These are the operators for
which the eigenvalue problem is unsolvable, and since no proper extensions exist
(because of maximality) this state of aﬀairs is the ﬁnal one. These operators are
characterized by E = R∞, F ̸= R∞or E ̸= R∞, F = R∞. Such operators
in fact exist, and they can all be generated from two simple normal forms, so
they can be regarded as exceptional cases when compared with the maximal
operators with a solvable eigenvalue problem. The reader will ﬁnd more on
this subject in the paper of the author mentioned in Note 95. In any case,
such operators must be eliminated for the present from quantum mechanical
considerations.
The reason for this is that the resolution of the identity
belonging
to
a
Hermitian
operator
enters
(as
we
shall
see
later)
so
essentially into all quantum mechanical concepts that we cannot dispense with
its existence; i.e., with the solvability of the eigenvalue problem.105 We shall
accordingly admit only such Hermitian operators in general whose eigenvalue
problem is solvable. Since this requires a sharpening of maximality, these will
be called hypermaximal operators.106
In conclusion, mention should be made of two classes of (closed) Hermitian
operators which are certainly hypermaximal too. First the continuous operators:
these are deﬁned everywhere, and are therefore maximal, and since their
105 Nevertheless, as the author has pointed out (see the reference in Note 78),
the following operator is maximal, but not hypermaximal: let R∞be the closed
space of all f(q) deﬁned on 0 ⩽q < +∞with f(0) = 0 and ﬁnite
$ ∞
|f(q)|2dq
and let R be the operator i d
dq which is deﬁned for all continuously diﬀerentiable
f(q) with ﬁnite
$ +∞
−∞
|f ′(q)|2dq
and f(0) = 0, and which is closed. It is then equal to −1
ℏA′ if we take the
A′ in II.8 for the interval 0, ∞. This R is now maximal but not hypermaximal.
This can be veriﬁed by eﬀective calculation of E, F. This is noteworthy because
A′ = ℏR can be interpreted physically as the momentum operator in the half
space bounded on one side by the plane q = 0.
106 This concept originated with Erhard Schmidt. See the reference in Note 78.


10. Commutative Operators
eigenvalue problem is solvable according to Hilbert (see the reference in Note 70)
they are even hypermaximal.
Second, the real operators in any realization
of R∞, if they are maximal.
The only diﬀerence between E and F in their
deﬁnitions was the sign of i which—if everything else is real—can make no
diﬀerence. Therefore F = R∞follows from E = R∞, and conversely; i.e., the
hypermaximality from the maximality. Without assumption of the maximal
property, we can in any event say that R∞−E and R∞−F have equally many
dimensions.
Therefore
(in
the
terminology
employed
above
in
the
investigation of the extension relations) p = q, therefore r = p = q and
[E, φ1, . . . , φr] = [E, R∞−E ] = R∞
[F, φ1, . . . , φr] = [F, R∞−F] = R∞
i.e., the extensions obtained at that time were hypermaximal. In any case, real
operators possess hypermaximal extensions. In the reference given in Note 95
it is shown that the same holds true for all deﬁnite operators.
10. COMMUTATIVE OPERATORS
Two operators R, S commute, by reason of the deﬁnition given in II.4, if
RS = SR; if the two are not deﬁned everywhere, the domains on either side
must coincide. To begin, we restrict ourselves to Hermitian operators, and in
order to avoid diﬃculties with regard to the domains we limit ourselves to those
operators which are deﬁned everywhere, hence to continuous operators. Along
with R, S we also consider the resolutions of the identity belonging to them:
E(λ), F(λ).
The commutativity of R, S means that (RSf, g) = (SRf, g) for all f, g; i.e.,
(Sf, Rg) = (Rf, Sg). Furthermore, the commutativity of Rn, S (n = 0, 1, 2, . . .)
follows from that of R, S, from which the commutativity of p(R), S also follows,
where p(x) = a0 + a1x + · · · + anxn.
Now symbolically,
R =
$ +C
−C
λdE(λ),
s(R) =
$ +C
−C
s(λ)dE(λ)
(C is the constant introduced in II.9 for the continuous operator R, which was
called A at that time; s(x) is any function, see Note 94 in II.8). For polynomials
s(x) we have (s(R)f, Sg) = (Sf, s(R)g), therefore
*
$ +C
−C
s(λ)d(E(λ)f, Sg) =
$ +C
−C
s(λ)d(Sf, E(λ)g)
Since we can approximate every continuous function s(x) arbitrarily well by
polynomials (uniformly in −C ⩽x ⩽+C), * also holds for continuous s(λ).
Now let
s(x) =
%
λ0 −x
for
x ⩽λ0
for
x ⩾λ0


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Then * gives
$ λ0
−C
(λ0 −λ)d(E(λ)f, Sg) =
$ λ0
−C
(λ0 −λ)d(Sf, E(λ)g)
If we replace λ0 by λ0 + ϵ (ϵ > 0), then subtraction and division by ϵ gives
$ λ0
−C
d(E(λ)f, Sg) +
$ λ0+ϵ
λ0
λ −λ0
ϵ
d(E(λ)f, Sg)
=
$ λ0
−C
d(Sf, E(λ)g) +
$ λ0+ϵ
λ0
λ −λ0
ϵ
d(Sf, E(λ)g)
and as ϵ →0 (recall S1!):
$ λ0
−C
d(E(λ)f, Sg) =
$ λ0
−C
d(Sf, E(λ)g)
(E(λ0)f, Sg) = (Sf, E(λ0)g)
Consequently, all E(λ0) , −C ⩽λ0 ⩽+C commute with S. But this is all the
more true for the remaining E(λ0), since for λ0 < −C and λ0 > +C we have,
respectively, E(λ0) = O and E(λ0) = I.
Therefore, if R commutes with S then all E(λ0) do likewise. Conversely,
if all E(λ0) commute with S then * holds for each s(x). Consequently all s(R)
commute with S. From this we may conclude: ﬁrst, that R commutes with
S if and only if all E(λ) do; and second, that in this case all functions of R
[the s(R)] also commute with S.
But an E(λ) commutes with S if and only if this holds for E(λ) and all
F(µ) (we apply our theorem to S, E(λ) instead of R, S). Therefore this is also
characteristic for the commutativity of R, S: all E(λ) commute with all F(µ).
Furthermore, the commutativity of R, S has, from the above, the commutativity
of r(R), S as a consequence. If we replace R, S by S, r(R) we then obtain the
commutativity of r(R), s(S).
If the Hermitian operators R, S are not subject to a continuity requirement
then the situation is more complicated, for the relationship between the domains
of RS and SR may then become quite involved. For example, R · O is always
deﬁned (Of = 0, R·Of = R(Of) = R(0) = 0) while, on the other hand, O· R
is deﬁned only if R is deﬁned (see the comments on this in II.5). Therefore
for R not deﬁned everywhere, R · O ̸= O · R because of the diﬀerence in the
domains.
That is—taking it literally— R, O do not commute.
Such a state
of aﬀairs is unsatisfactory for our later purposes: O should commute not only
with all continuous Hermitian operators but also even with Hermitian operators
that are not continuous.107
We therefore want to deﬁne commutativity for
107 Since (see II.5) R · I, I · R are deﬁned if and only if R is deﬁned, the same
holds for R · aI, aI · R (a ̸= 0). Then these two products are equal; i.e., R
and aI commute. Consequently, the commutativity of R and aI holds with a
single exception: a = 0, R not deﬁned everywhere. This is unfortunate, and
strengthens our motivation to adjust the deﬁnition of continuity.


10. Commutative Operators
discontinuous R, S in a diﬀerent way. We limit ourselves to hypermaximal R, S
which, by II.9, are the only operators of interest to us. Operators R, S will be
called commutative in the new sense if all E(λ) commute with all F(µ) (where
these are again the respective resolutions of the identity) in the old sense. For
continuous R and S the new deﬁnition is identical to the old, while if either (or
both) of R and S is discontinuous it diﬀers. An example of the latter case is
provided by R and O: in the old sense they did not commute, but in the new
sense they do, since for O each F(µ) is either O or I;108 therefore each F(µ)
commutes with each of the E(λ).
We have proved above that if R, S are two commutative (continuous)
Hermitian operators then each function r(R) of R commutes with each function
s(S) of S. Since the hypothesis is always satisﬁed for R = S, two functions
r(R), s(R) of the same operator always commute (this also follows from the
multiplication formula at the end of II.8: r(R)s(R) = t(R) with r(x)s(x) = t(x)).
If r(x), s(x) are real, by the way, then r(R), s(R) are Hermitian (by II.8: if r(x)
is real then (r(R))∗= ¯r(R) = r(R)).
The converse is also valid. If A, B are two commuting Hermitian operators,
then there exists a Hermitian operator R of which both are functions; i.e.,
A = r(R), B = s(R). Indeed, even more is true: if an arbitrary (ﬁnite or inﬁnite)
set A, B, C, . . . of commuting Hermitian operators is given, then there exists a
Hermitian operator R of which all A, B, C, . . . are functions. We give no proof
of this theorem here, and can only refer to the literature on the subject.109 For
our purposes this theorem is of importance only for a ﬁnite number of operators
A, B, C, . . . with pure discrete spectra. It will be proved for this case in following
paragraphs; regarding the general case we can give only a few orienting remarks.
Therefore, let A, B, C, . . . be a ﬁnite number of Hermitian operators with
pure discrete spectra. If λ is any number, let the closed linear manifold spanned
by all the solutions of Af = λf be called Lλ, and its projection Eλ. Then λ is
a discrete eigenvalue of A if and only if solutions f ̸= 0 exist, hence Lλ ̸= O;
i.e., Eλ ̸= O. Correspondingly, we have Mλ, Fλ for B; Nλ, Gλ for C; etc. From
Af = λf is follows that ABf = BAf = B(λf) = λ(Bf); i.e., along with f, Bf
also belongs to Lλ. Since Eλ always belongs to Lλ, BEλf does also, therefore
108 This resolution of the identity belongs to a · I:
F(µ) =
%
I
for
µ ⩾a
O
for
µ < a
This can easily be veriﬁed.
109 For two Hermitian operators A, B which belong to a special class (the
so-called totally continuous class; see the reference in Note 70) Toeplitz proved
(see the reference in Note 33) a theorem from which the above follows; namely,
the existence of a complete orthonormal set from the common eigenfunctions
of A, B. The general theorem for arbitrary A, B or A, B, C, . . . has been proved
by the author (see Note 94).


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
EλBEλf = BEλf.
This holds identically: EλBEλ = BEλ.
Application of *
results in EλBEλ = EλB, therefore EλB = BEλ.
In the same way that we
just now deduced the commutativity of B, Eλ from that of A, B, that of Eλ, Fµ
follows from that of B, Eλ. Since A, B are in no way distinguished from the
other A, B, C, . . . we can say that all Eλ, Fµ, Gν, . . . commute with each other.
Consequently K(λµν . . .) = EλFµGν · · · is a projection.
Let its closed linear
manifold be called K(λµν · · ·).
By theorem 14 (II.4), K(λµν · · ·) is the
intersection of Lλ, Mµ, Nν, . . . ; i.e., the totality of common solutions of
Af = λf,
Bf = µf,
Cf = νf,
. . .
Let λ, µ, ν, . . . and λ′, µ′, ν ′, . . . be two diﬀerent sets of numbers; i.e., λ ̸= λ′
or µ ̸= µ′ or ν ̸= ν ′ or. . . . If f belongs to K(λµν . . .) and f ′ to K(λ′µ′ν ′ . . .)
then f, f ′ are orthogonal. For λ ̸= λ′ this is so because Af = λf, Af ′ = λ′f ′; for
µ ̸= µ′ because Bf = µf, Bf ′ = µ′f ′; . . . . Consequently the entire K(λµν . . .)
is orthogonal to the entire K(λ′µ′ν ′ . . .).
Since A has a pure discrete spectrum, Lλ spans the entire R∞(as a closed
linear manifold). An f ̸= 0 therefore cannot be orthogonal to all Lλ; i.e., for at
least one Lλ the projection of f in Lλ must be non-zero; i.e., Eλf ̸= 0. In the
same way, a µ must exist with Fµf ̸= 0, and moreover a ν with Gνf ̸= 0, etc.
Consequently, for each f ̸= 0 we can ﬁnd a λ with Eλf ̸= 0, hence a µ with
Fµ(Eλf) ̸= 0, then a ν with Gν(Fµ(Eλf))) ̸= 0, etc. Thus are we led ﬁnally to
· · · GνFµEλf ̸= 0, EλFµGν · · · f ̸= 0, K(λµν . . .)f ̸= 0; i.e., f is not orthogonal
to K(λµν . . .). Therefore an f orthogonal to all K(λµν . . .) is = 0. Consequently,
the K(λµν . . .) together span all R∞as a closed linear manifold.
Now let φ(1)
λµν..., φ(2)
λµν..., . . . be an orthonormal set which spans the linear
manifold K(λµν . . .). (This sequence may or may not terminate, depending on
whether K(λµν . . .) has a ﬁnite or inﬁnite number of dimensions. On the other
hand, if K(λµν . . .) = 0 then it consists of 0 terms.) Each φ(n)
λµν... belongs to a
K(λµν . . .) and is therefore an eigenfunction of all A, B, C, . . . . Two diﬀerent
such functions are always mutually orthogonal: if they have the same λµν...
indices they are so by reason of their deﬁnition, while if they have diﬀerent
λµν... indices they are so because they belong to diﬀerent K(λµν . . .). The set of
all φ(n)
λµν... span the same linear manifold as the set of all K(λµν . . .), namely R∞.
Consequently the φ(n)
λµν... form a complete orthonormal set.
We have now produced a complete orthonormal set from the common
eigenfunctions of A, B, C, . . . . We now call these ψ1, ψ2, . . . and we write the
corresponding eigenvalue equations
Aψm = λmψm,
Bψm = µmψm,
Cψm = νmψm,
. . .
We now take any set of pairwise diﬀerent numbers κ1, κ2, κ3, . . . and form
a Hermitian operator R with the pure discrete spectrum κ1, κ2, κ3, . . . and with


10. Commutative Operators
the corresponding eigenfunctions ψ1, ψ2, ψ3, . . . :110
R
&
∞
#
m=1
xmψm
'
=
∞
#
m=1
xmκmψm
Now let F(κ) be a function deﬁned in −∞< κ < +∞for which F(κm) = λm
(m = 1, 2, 3, . . .) (at all other points κ the value of F(κ) may be arbitrary).
Similarly, let G(κ) have the property G(κm) = µm, H(κ) have the property
H(κm) = νm, etc. We wish to show that
A = F(R),
B = G(R),
C = H(R),
. . .
To that end, we must show that if R has a pure discrete spectrum κ1, κ2, . . .
with eigenfunctions ψ1, ψ2, . . . then F(R) has the pure discrete spectrum
F(κ1), F(κ2), . . . with the same eigenfunctions ψ1, ψ2, . . . . But since these also
form a complete orthonormal set, it suﬃces to show that F(R)ψm = F(κm)·ψm.
Let (by II.8)
E(λ) =
#
κm ⩽λ
P[ψm]
be the resolution of the identity belonging to R. Then symbolically
R =
$
λ dE(λ)
and by deﬁnition
F(R) =
$
F(λ)dE(λ)
Furthermore,
E(λ)ψm =
%
ψm
for
κm ⩽λ
for
κm > λ
110 The chosen κ1, κ2, κ3, . . . are to be bounded (for example, κm =
1m) in
order that R be continuous. In fact,
∥Rψm∥= ∥κmψm∥= |κm| ⩽C · ∥ψm∥,
|κm| < C
follows immediately from the continuity of R; i.e., from ∥Rf∥⩽C · ∥f∥.
Conversely, from |κm| ⩽C (m = 1, 2, . . .) it follows that
∥Rf∥2 = ∥R
&
∞
#
m=1
xmψm
'
∥2 = ∥
∞
#
m=1
xmκmψm∥2 =
∞
#
m=1
|xm|2|κm|2
∥f∥2 = ∥
∞
#
m=1
xmψm∥2 =
∞
#
m=1
|xm|2
Therefore ∥Rf∥2 ⩽C2· ∥f∥2, ∥Rf∥⩽C · ∥f∥; i.e., R is continuous.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
From this it follows that
(F(R)ψm, g) =
$
F(λ)d(E(λ)ψm, g) = F(κm) · (ψm, g)
for all g. Therefore it is actually true that F(R)ψm = F(κm) · ψm.
With this, the problem is settled for the case of pure discrete spectra, as we
asserted previously. In the case of continuous spectra we must be content with
the reference of Note 109, and shall discuss here only an especially characteristic
case.
Let R∞be the space of all f(q1, q2) with ﬁnite
((
|f(q1, q2)|2dq1dq2, and
let the unit square 0 ⩽q1, q2 ⩽1 be their domain of variation. We form the
operators A = q1· and B = q2· . They are Hermitian for this {q1, q2}-region
(but not for −∞⩽q1, q2 ⩽+∞!) and they commute. Therefore both must
be functions of an R. Consequently, this R commutes with A, B, from which
it follows (although we will not prove this here) that R has the form s(q1, q2)·
(s(q1, q2) a bounded function). Consequently Rn is equal to s(q1, q2)n·, and
F(R) is equal to F(s(q1, q2))· if F(κ) is a polynomial. But this formula can be
extended to all F(κ), which we will again not discuss in detail. It also follows
from F(R) = A, G(R) = B that111
F(s(q1, q2)) = q1,
G(s(q1, q2)) = q2
That is, the mappings s(q1, q2) = κ and F(κ) = q1, G(κ) = q2 (which are
reciprocal to each other) must map the square surface 0 ⩽q1, q2 ⩽1 to the
linear number set of the κ uniquely—something which conﬂicts with ordinary
geometric intuition.
But on the basis or our previously discussed proof we know that this
must nevertheless be possible—and indeed: a mapping of the desired type is
accomplished by means of the so-called Peano curve.112
The more rigorous
treatment of the proof given in Note 109 actually shows that this leads in the
present case to the Peano curve or to constructs that are closely related to it.
11. THE TRACE
Several important invariants of operators shall be deﬁned here.
For a matrix {aµν} that acts on Rn, the trace )n
µ=1 aµµ is one such
invariant. It is unitary-invariant; that is, it does not change if we transform the
{aµν} to another (cartesian) coordinate system.113 But if we replace {aµν} by
the corresponding operator
A{x1, . . . , xn} = {y1, . . . , yn}
:
yµ =
n
#
ν=1
aµνxν
111 Exceptions may occur in a {q1, q2}-set of Lebesgue measure 0.
112 See, for example, the reference in Note 45.
113 {aµν} refers to the transformation (i.e., to the operator that accomplishes
the transformation)
continued on the next page


11. The Trace
then the aµν are expressed as follows, with the help of A:
φ1 = {1, 0, . . . , 0}
φ2 = {0, 1, . . . , 0}
...
φn = {0, 0, . . . , 1}
form a complete orthonormal set, and obviously aµν = (Aφν, φµ) (see II.5, in
particular Note 60).
The trace is therefore )n
µ=1(Aφµ, φµ) and its unitary
invariance means that its value is the same for each complete orthonormal set.
We can immediately consider the analogy of this concept in R∞. Let A be
a linear operator. We take a complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . for which all
Aφn are deﬁned (this is certainly possible if the domain of A is everywhere dense;
it suﬃces to orthogonalize a dense sequence f1, f2, . . . in it, by II.2, theorem
8), and set
Tr A =
∞
#
µ=1
(Aφµ, φµ)
where Tr A signiﬁes the trace of A.
We must now show that this actually
depends on A (and not on the φµ!).
For this purpose we introduce two complete orthonormal sets, φ1, φ2, . . .
and ψ1, ψ2, . . ., and set
Tr(A; φ, ψ) =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(Aφµ, ψν)(ψν, φµ)
ηµ =
n
#
ν=1
aµνξν
:
µ = 1, . . . , n
(see the developments in II.7). If we transform by
ξµ =
n
#
ν=1
xνµxν,
ηµ =
n
#
ν=1
xνµyν
:
µ = 1, . . . , n
then we obtain
yν =
n
#
ν=1
aµνxν
:
µ = 1, . . . , n
with
aµν =
n
#
ρ,σ=1
aρσ¯xµρxνσ
:
µ, ν = 1, . . . , n
{aµν} is the transformed matrix. Clearly
n
#
µ=1
aµµ =
n
#
µ,ρ,σ=1
aρσ¯xµρxµσ =
n
#
ρ,σ=1
aρσ
&
n
#
µ=1
¯xµρxµσ
'
=
n
#
ρ=1
aρρ
i.e., the trace is invariant.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
From II.2, theorem 7γ it follows that this is equal to )∞
µ=1(Aφµ, φµ), and so
depends only apparently on the ψν. Furthermore,
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(Aφµ, ψν)(ψν, φµ) =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(φµ, A∗ψν)(ψν, φµ)
=
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(A∗ψν, φµ)(φµ, ψν)
i.e., Tr(A; φ, ψ) = Tr(A∗; ψ, φ). Since the right side, according to the above,
depends only apparently on the φµ, the same holds on the left; the dependence of
these expressions on φµ and ψν is therefore only apparent. In reality, therefore,
the trace depends only on A. Consequently, we may designate Tr(A; φ, ψ) with
TrA. Since this is equal to )∞
µ=1(Aφµ, φµ), the desired invariance proof has
been achieved. But from the last equation it also follows that
TrA = TrA∗
The relations
Tr(aA) = a TrA,
Tr(A ± B) = TrA ± TrB
are obvious. Furthermore
Tr(AB) = Tr(BA)
holds, even for non-commuting A, B. This may be shown as follows:
Tr(AB) =
∞
#
µ−1
(ABφµ, φµ) =
∞
#
µ−1
(Bφµ, A∗φµ)
=
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(Bφµ, ψν)(ψν, A∗φµ) =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(Bφµ, ψν)(Aψν, φµ)
in which φ1, φ2, . . . and ψ1, ψ2, . . . can be two arbitrary complete orthonormal
sets. The symmetry of this expression under simultaneous interchange of A, B
and φ, ψ is evident. It follows, moreover, that for Hermitian operators A, B
Tr(AB) = Tr[(AB)∗] = Tr(B∗A∗)
= Tr(B A ) = Tr(AB)
Therefore Tr(AB) is real (and TrA, TrB are, of course, real too).
If M is a closed linear manifold, andE its projection, thenTrE is determined
as follows: Let ψ1, . . . , ψk be an orthonormal set which spans the closed linear
manifold M and χ1, . . . , χℓone which spans R∞−M (of course, one of k or ℓ


11. The Trace
—or both—must be inﬁnite). Then ψ1, . . . , ψk, χ1, . . . , χℓtogether span R∞;
i.e., they form a complete orthonormal set (theorem 7α in II.2). Therefore
TrE =
k
#
µ=1
(Eψµ, ψµ) +
ℓ
#
µ=1
(Eχµ, χµ)
=
k
#
µ=1
(ψµ, ψµ) +
ℓ
#
µ=1
(0, χµ) =
k
#
µ=1
1 = k
i.e., TrE is the dimension of M.
If A is deﬁnite then all (Aφµ, φµ) ⩾0, therefore TrA ⩾0. If in this case
TrA = 0 then all the (Aφµ, φµ) must vanish, therefore Aφµ = 0 (theorem 19
in II.5). If ∥φ∥= 1 then we can ﬁnd a complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . with
φ1 = φ. (Indeed, let f1, f2, . . . be everywhere dense. We can then orthogonalize
φ, f1, f2, . . .—see the proof of theorem 7 in II.2—by which means we obtain a
complete orthonormal set beginning with φ.) Therefore Aφ = 0. If now f is
arbitrary, then Af = 0 holds for f = 0, while for f ̸= 0 we recover Af = 0 from
the above by writing
φ =
∥f∥f
So TrA = 0 would entail A = O. We conclude that if A is deﬁnite, then TrA > 0.
In the brevity and simplicity of our observations concerning the trace
our treatment has not been mathematically rigorous. For example, we have
considered the series
∞
#
µ,ν=1
(Aφµ, φν)(ψν, φµ)
and
∞
#
µ=1
(Aφµ, φµ)
without examining their convergence, and we have transformed one into the
other. In short, everything has been done which one should not do when working
in correct mathematical fashion. As a matter of fact, this kind of negligence is
present elsewhere in theoretical physics, and the present treatment actually will
produce no disastrous consequences in our quantum mechanical applications.
Nevertheless it must be understood that we have been careless.
It is therefore the more important to point out that in the fundamental
statistical assertions of quantum mechanics the trace is employed only for
operators of the form AB, where A, B are both deﬁnite—and that this concept
can be established with complete rigor. In the remainder of this section we
shall therefore assemble those facts concerning the trace which are capable of
proof with absolute mathematical rigor.
We ﬁrst consider the trace of A∗A (A arbitrary: A∗A is Hermitian by II.4
and, since (A∗Af, f) = (Af, Af) ⩾0, it is deﬁnite). Then
Tr(A∗A) =
∞
#
µ=1
(A∗Aφµ, φµ) =
∞
#
µ=1
(Aφµ, Aφµ) =
∞
#
µ=1
∥Aφµ∥2


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Since all terms in this series are ⩾0 it is either convergent or diverges to +∞,
and therefore it is in any case deﬁned. We now want to show—independently
of the previous discussion—that its sum is independent of the choice of the
φ1, φ2, . . . . In this case, only series with terms ⩾0 will appear, therefore all
will be deﬁned, and all re-summations are permissible.
Let φ1, φ2, . . . and ψ1, ψ2, . . . be two complete orthonormal sets. We deﬁne
Σ(A; φµ, ψν) =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(Aφµ, ψν)|2
By theorem 7γ in II.2, this is equal to
∞
#
µ=1
∥Aφµ∥2
i.e., Σ(A; φµ, ψν) depends only apparently on the ψν. Furthermore (assuming
Aφµ and A∗ψν to be deﬁned)
Σ(A; φµ, ψν) =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(Aφµ, ψν)|2 =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(φµ, A∗ψν)|2 =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(A∗ψν, φµ, )|2
= Σ(A∗; ψν, φµ)
Therefore the dependence on the φµ is also only apparent, because this is the
case on the right side of the formula. Consequently, Σ(A; φµ, ψν) depends in
general only on A. We then call it simply Σ(A). By the above proofs
Σ(A) =
∞
#
µ=1
∥Aφµ∥2 =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(Aφµ, ψν)|2
and Σ(A) = Σ(A∗). Therefore Tr(A∗A) is correctly re-deﬁned as Σ(A).
We now prove independently several properties of Σ(A) which also follow
from general properties of TrA as previously deﬁned.
From the deﬁnition it follows in general that Σ(A) ⩾0 and that for
Σ(A) = 0 all Aφµ must vanish, from which it follows as before that A = O.
That is, if A ̸= O then Σ(A) > 0.
Obviously Σ(aA) = |a|2Σ(A). If A∗B = O then
∥(A + B)φµ∥2 −∥Aφµ∥2 −∥Bφµ∥2 = (Aφµ, Bφµ) + (Bφµ, Aφµ)
= 2Re(Aφµ, Bφµ)
= 2Re(φµ, A∗Bφµ) = 0
so, after summation )∞
µ=1,
Σ(A + B) = Σ(A) + Σ(B)


11. The Trace
This relation does not change if we interchange A, B. Therefore it is also valid
for B∗A = O. Furthermore, we can replace A, B in it by A∗, B∗. Then BA∗= O
or AB∗= O are likewise suﬃcient. For Hermitian A (or B) we can therefore
write BA = O (or AB = O).
If E projects onto the closed linear manifold M then, for the ψ1, . . . , ψk,
χ1, . . . , χℓconsidered in the determination of TrE, we have
Σ(E) =
k
#
µ=1
∥Eψµ∥2 +
ℓ
#
µ=1
∥Eχµ∥2 =
k
#
µ=1
∥ψµ∥2 +
ℓ
#
µ=1
∥0∥2
=
k
#
µ=1
1 + 0 = k
So Σ(E) also is the dimension of M (which, because E∗E = EE∗= E, is just
what one would expect).
For two deﬁnite (Hermitian) operators A, B our TrAB is now reducible to Σ.
That is, there are two operators A′, B′ of the same category with A′2 = A,
B′2 = B114—we call them
√
A,
√
B. We have the formal relations
114 The precise proposition runs as follows: If A is hypermaximal and deﬁnite,
then there exists one and only one operator A′ of the same category with A′2 = A.
We prove the existence. Let A =
( +∞
−∞λdE(λ) be the eigenvalue representation
of A. Since A is deﬁnite, then E(λ) is constant for λ < 0 (and therefore equals
0 by S1). For otherwise, E(λ2)−E(λ1) ̸= O for suitable λ1 < λ2 < 0. Therefore
an f can be chosen with [E(λ2) −E(λ1)]f = f. But it follows from this, as we
have deduced several times previously, that
E(λ) =
%
f
for
λ ⩾λ2
for
λ ⩽λ1
Therefore
(Af, f) =
$ +∞
−∞
λd(E(λ)f, f) =
$ λ2
λ1
λd(E(λ)f, f)
⩽
$ λ2
λ1
λ2 d(E(λ)f, f)
= λ2([E(λ2) −E(λ1)]f, f) = λ2(f, f) < 0
Consequently
A =
$ +∞
−∞
λdE(λ) =
$ +∞
λdE(λ) =
$ +∞
µ2 dE(µ2)
and A′ =
( +∞
µdE(µ2) yields the desired result. We may observe that we have
deduced from the property of deﬁniteness that E(λ) = O for λ < 0, and since
deﬁniteness clearly follows from this, the fact that the entire spectrum is ⩾0 is
characteristic for deﬁniteness.


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Tr(AB) = Tr(
√
A
√
A
√
B ·
√
B) = Tr(
√
B ·
√
A
√
A
√
B)
= Tr((
√
A
√
B)∗(
√
A
√
B))
= Σ(
√
A
√
B)
This Σ(
√
A
√
B), by reason of its own deﬁnition and without consideration of
its relation to the trace, has all the properties one expects of TrAB, namely:
Σ(
√
A
√
B) = Σ(
√
B
√
A)
Σ(
√
A
√
B + C) = Σ(
√
A
√
B) + Σ(
√
A
√
C)
Σ(
√
A + B
√
C) = Σ(
√
A
√
C) + Σ(
√
B
√
C)
The ﬁrst follows from the fact that Σ(XY) is symmetric in X, Y:
Σ(XY) =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(XYφµ, ψν)|2 =
∞
#
µ,ν=1
|(Yφµ, Xψν)|2
The second follows from the third by reason of the ﬁrst property. Therefore
this third property is the only one which need be proved; i.e., that Σ(
√
A
√
B)
is additive in A. But this can be seen if we write Σ(
√
A
√
B) as
Σ(
√
A
√
B) =
∞
#
µ=1
∥
√
A
√
Bφµ∥2 =
∞
#
µ=1
(
√
A
√
Bφµ,
√
A
√
Bφµ)
=
∞
#
µ=1
(
√
A ·
√
A
√
Bφµ,
√
Bφµ) =
∞
#
µ=1
(A
√
Bφµ,
√
Bφµ)
In this way, we have established a rigorous foundation for the concept of trace
to the extent which was desired.
In addition, the last formula permits the following conclusion: it A, B are
deﬁnite then AB = O is a consequence of TrAB = 0. For the latter implies that
Σ(
√
A
√
B) = 0 and therefore that
√
A
√
B = O (see the discussion on page 114
and also the considerations given above with regard to Σ). Therefore
AB =
√
A ·
√
A
√
B ·
√
B = O
For a deﬁnite Hermitian operator A the calculation with the trace is correct
even in its original form. Indeed, let φ1, φ2, . . . be a complete orthonormal set.
Then
∞
#
µ=1
(Aφµ, φµ)
(the sum which should deﬁne the trace) is a sum with all terms non-negative,
and is therefore either convergent or divergent to +∞. Two cases are then
possible: either the sum is inﬁnite for each choice of φ1, φ2, . . ., and therefore


11. The Trace
the trace is actually deﬁned independently of φ1, φ2, . . . and equals +∞, or the
sum is ﬁnite for at least one choice of φ1, φ2, . . .; say φ1, φ2, . . . . Then—since
! ∞
"
µ=1
(Aφµ, φµ)
#2
=
∞
"
µ,ν=1
(Aφµ, φµ)(Aφν, φν) ⩾
∞
"
µ,ν=1
|(Aφµ, φν)|2 = Σ(A)
—Σ(A) is also ﬁnite, and is equal to some C2. If ψ1, ψ2, . . . is any complete
orthonormal set, then
Σ(A) =
∞
"
µ=1
∥Aψµ∥2 = C2,
∥Aψ1∥2 ⩽C2,
∥Aψ1∥⩽C
Since each ψ with ∥ψ∥= 1 can be chosen as the ψ1 of such a system, it follows
from ∥ψ∥= 1 that ∥Aψ∥⩽C. In general then, ∥Af∥⩽C · ∥f∥: for f = 0 this
is obvious, while for f ̸= 0 it suﬃces to set ψ =
∥f∥·f. Consequently A satisﬁes
the condition Co from II.9. It is therefore a continuous operator. But actually
even more is true.
Because of the ﬁnite nature of Σ(A), A belongs to the class of so-called
totally continuous operators. Hilbert showed that the eigenvalue problem for
such an operator is solvable in the original form; i.e., that a complete orthogonal
set ψ1, ψ2, . . . with Aψµ = λµψµ exists (and for µ →∞, λµ →0).115 Because
115 See the reference in Note 64. A direct proof runs as follows: Let
λ0 < λ1 < · · · < λn
:
$ all ⩽−ϵ or ⩾+ϵ
E(λ0) ̸= E(λ1) ̸= · · · ̸= E(λn)
Then E(λν) −E(λν−1) ̸= 0, therefore φν ̸= 0 can be chosen with
[E(λν) −E(λν−1)]φν = φν
It follows from this that
E(λ)φ =
$ φν
for
λ ⩾λν
for
λ ⩽λν−1
and we can even make ∥φν∥= 1. It follows from the above that (φµ, φν) = 0 for
µ ̸= ν. The φ1, . . . φn consequently form an orthogonal set, and we can extend
it to a complete one: φ1, . . . φn, φn+1, . . . . We have (ν = 1, . . . , n)
∥Aφν∥2 =
% +∞
−∞
λ2d∥E(λ)φν∥2 =
% λν
λν−1
λ2d∥E(λ)φν∥2
⩾
% λν
λν−1
ϵ2 d∥E(λ)φν∥2
= ϵ2!
∥E(λν)φν∥2 −∥E(λν)φν−1∥2#
= ϵ2∥φν∥2 = ϵ2


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
the operator is deﬁnite, λµ = (Aψµ, ψµ) ⩾0, and furthermore
∞
"
µ=1
λ2
µ =
∞
"
µ=1
∥Aψµ∥2 = Σ(A) = C2
If φ1, φ2, . . . is any complete orthonormal set then
∞
"
µ=1
(Aφµ, φµ) =
∞
"
µ=1
! ∞
"
ν=1
(Aφµ, ψν)(ψν, φµ)
#
=
∞
"
µ=1
! ∞
"
ν=1
(φµ, Aψν)(ψν, φµ)
#
=
∞
"
µ=1
! ∞
"
ν=1
λν(φµ, ψν)(ψν, φµ)
#
=
∞
"
µ=1
! ∞
"
ν=1
λν|(φµ, ψν)|2#
Since all terms are ⩾0 we may rearrange the summations:
∞
"
µ=1
(Aφµ, φµ) =
∞
"
µ,ν=1
λν|(φµ, ψν)|2 =
∞
"
ν=1
λν
! ∞
"
µ=1
|(φµ, ψν)|2#
=
∞
"
ν=1
λν∥φν∥2 =
∞
"
ν=1
λν
In this case, therefore, &∞
µ=1(Aφµ, φµ) is again independent of φ1, φ2, . . . , and
is actually equal to the sum of the eigenvalues.
Since the sum is ﬁnite for
φ1, φ2, . . . it is therefore always ﬁnite. That is, TrA is again unique, but this
time it is ﬁnite. Calculation with the trace is therefore justiﬁed in both cases.
We now give several estimates relative to TrA and Σ(A). For all A with
ﬁnite Σ(A), ∥Af∥⩽
'
Σ(A)∥f∥; for all deﬁnite (Hermitian) A with ﬁnite TrA,
∥Af∥⩽TrA · ∥f∥.
Now let A again be deﬁnite, with TrA = 1.
For an
appropriate φ with ∥φ∥= 1, ∥Aφ∥⩾1 −ϵ or (Aφ, φ) ⩾1 −ϵ.
It suﬃces
to consider the second case, since the ﬁrst follows from the second because
(Aφ, φ) ⩽∥Aφ∥· ∥φ∥= ∥Aφ∥(put (1 −ϵ)2 ⩾1 −2ϵ in place of 1 −ϵ, therefore
2ϵ in place of ϵ).
and therefore
∞
"
µ=1
∥Aφµ∥2



⩾&n
µ=1 ∥Aφµ∥2 ⩾nϵ2
= Σ(A) = C2
i.e., n ⩽C2/ϵ2. Then, for |λ| ⩾ϵ, E(λ) can in general assume only ⩽2 · C2/ϵ2
many diﬀerent values. It can therefore change only in a ﬁnite number of places,
the remainder being made up of constancy intervals. That is, for |λ| ⩾ϵ only
a discrete spectrum exists. Since this holds for all ϵ > 0, only a pure discrete
spectrum is present in general.


11. The Trace
Let ψ be orthogonal to φ,∥ψ∥= 1. Then we can ﬁnd a complete orthonormal
set χ1, χ2, χ3 . . . with χ1 = φ, χ2 = ψ. Therefore
∞
"
µ=1
∥Aχµ∥2



= Σ(A) ⩽[TrA]2 = 1
⩾∥Aφ∥2 + ∥Aψ∥2 ⩾1 −2ϵ + ∥Aψ∥2
∥Aψ∥2 ⩽2ϵ,
|Aψ∥⩽
√
2ϵ
For an arbitrary f orthogonal to φ it follows that ∥Af∥⩽
√
2ϵ ∥f∥.
(For
f = 0 this is obvious.
Otherwise, ψ =
∥f∥· f.)
If we now remember that
(Af, g) = (f, Ag) then we obtain |(Af, g)| ⩽
√
2ϵ∥f∥· ∥g∥if either f or g is
orthogonal to φ.
Now let f, g be arbitrary, and write
f = αφ + f ′,
g = βφ + g ′
where f ′, g ′ are orthogonal to φ and α = (f, φ), β = (g, φ). Then
(Af, g) = α¯β(Aφ, φ) + α(Aφ, g ′) + ¯β(Af ′, φ) + (Af ′, g ′)
Therefore, if we set (Aφ, φ) = c,
|(Af, g) −cα¯β | ⩽|α| · |(Aφ, g ′)| + |β| · |(Af ′, φ)| + |(Af ′, g ′)|
and according to the above estimates
|(Af, g) −cα¯β | ⩽
√
2ϵ·
+
|α| · ∥g ′∥+ |β| · ∥f ′∥+ ∥f ′∥· ∥g ′∥
,
⩽
√
2ϵ·
-
|α| + ∥f ′∥
.-
|β| + ∥g ′∥
.
⩽2
√
2ϵ·
'
|α|2 + ∥f ′∥2'
|β|2 + ∥g ′∥2
= 2
√
2ϵ·∥f∥·∥g∥
On the other hand,
(Af, g) −cα¯β = (Af, g) −c(f, φ)(φ, g) = ((A −cP[φ])f, g)
In general, then, |((A −cP[φ])f, g)| ⩽2
√
2ϵ ·∥f∥·∥g∥. Therefore, as we know
from II.9,
∥((A −cP[φ])f∥⩽2
√
2ϵ ·∥f∥
For f = φ this implies that
∥Aφ −cφ∥⩽
√
2ϵ
c = ∥cφ∥



⩽
∥Aφ −cφ∥+ ∥Aφ∥⩽
√
2ϵ + 1
⩾−∥Aφ −cφ∥+ ∥Aφ∥⩾−2
√
2ϵ + (1 −ϵ)
1 −(ϵ + 2
√
2ϵ) ⩽c ⩽1 + 2
√
2ϵ
:
(c is real and ⩾0)


Chapter II: Abstract Hilbert Space
Consequently
∥((A −P[φ])f∥⩽∥((A −cP[φ])f∥+ ∥(c −1)P[φ]f∥
⩽2
√
2ϵ·∥f∥+
-
ϵ + 2
√
2ϵ
.
∥P[φ]f∥
⩽
-
ϵ + 4
√
2ϵ
.
·∥f∥
For ϵ →0 therefore A converges uniformly to P[φ].
In conclusion, let us consider TrA and TrB in the realizations FZ and FΩ
of R∞(see I.4 and II.3), since physical applications occur in these cases.
In FZ (set of all x1, x2, . . . with ﬁnite &∞
ν=1 |xν|2) A may be described by
a matrix{aµν}:
A{x1, . . . , xn} = {y1, . . . , yn}
:
yµ =
∞
"
ν=1
aµνxν
In terms of the complete orthonormal set
φ1 = {1, 0, 0, . . .},
φ2 = {0, 1, 0, . . .},
. . .
we have Aφµ = {a1µ, a2µ, . . .} = &∞
ρ=1 aρµφρ. Therefore (Aφµ, φµ) = aµµ and
∥Aφµ∥2 = &∞
ρ=1 |aρµ|2. From this it follows immediately that
TrA =
∞
"
µ=1
aµµ,
Σ(A) =
∞
"
µ,ν=1
|aµν|2
In FΩ(set of all f(P) deﬁned in Ωwith ﬁnite
/
Ω|f(P)|2dv) let us consider
only the integral operators
Af(P) =
%
Ω
a(P, P′)f(P′)dv′
where a(P, P′) is a two-variable function deﬁned in Ω, the “kernel” of A (see
I.4). Let φ1(P), φ2(P, . . . be any complete orthonormal set; then
TrA =
∞
"
µ=1
(Aφµ(P), φµ(P)) =
∞
"
µ=1
%
Ω
0 %
Ω
a(P, P′)f(P′)dv′1
φµ(P)dv
and because in general (theorem 7β in II.2, applied to g(P) )
∞
"
µ=1
! %
Ω
g(P′) φµ(P′) dv′#
φµ(P) = g(P)
∞
"
µ=1
! %
Ω
g(P′) φµ(P′) dv′#
φµ(P) = g(P)


11. The Trace
hold, we have
TrA =
%
Ω
a(P, P)dv
Furthermore
Σ(A) =
∞
"
µ=1
%
Ω
%
Ω
a(P, P′)φµ(P′)dv′222
dv
and therefore—because [theorem 7γ in II.2]
∞
"
µ=1
%
Ω
g(P′)φµ(P′)dv′222
=
∞
"
µ=1
%
Ω
g(P′) φµ(P′)dv′222
=
%
Ω
|g(P′)|2dv′
=
%
Ω
|g(P′)|2dv′
—it is also true that
Σ(A) =
%
Ω
%
Ω
|a(P, P′)|2dvdv′
We see that TrA, Σ(A) accomplish what was sought before by the use of
mathematically doubtful artiﬁces: in the transition from FZ to FΩ, &∞
µ=1 · · · is
replaced by
/
Ω· · · dv.
With this we have concluded our mathematical treatment of Hermitian
operators. The reader who is interested in the mathematics will ﬁnd more on
this subject in the literature relating to these topics.116
In addition to the original papers mentioned in the course of the preceding
discussion, the foremost reference is the encyclopedia article of Hellinger and
Toeplitz referred to in Note 33.


 


CHAPTER III
THE QUANTUM STATISTICS
1. THE STATISTICAL ASSERTIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
Let us now return to the analysis of the quantum mechanical theories, which
was interrupted by the mathematical considerations of Chapter II. At that time
we discussed only how quantum mechanics makes possible the determination of
all possible values of one particular physical quantity—energy. These values are
the eigenvalues of the energy operator (i.e., the numbers of its spectrum). On
the other hand, no mention was made about the values of other quantities, as
well as regarding the causal or statistical relations among the values of several
quantities. The statements of the theory relative to this problem should now be
considered. We shall take as a basis the wave mechanical method of description
since the equivalence of the two theories has already been established.
In the Schr¨odinger formalism, it is evident that everything which can
be said about the state of a system must be derived from its wave function
φ(q1, . . . , qk). (We suppose that the system has k degrees of freedom and employs
q1, . . . , qk as the coordinates of its conﬁguration.) Actually, this does not restrict
us to the stationary states of the system (quantum orbits in which φ is an
eigenfunction of H: Hφ = λφ, see I.3), but also admits all other states of the
system; i.e., wave functions which vary according to the Schr¨odinger time-
dependent diﬀerential equation Hφ = iℏ∂
∂tφ (see I.2). What pronouncements
can now be made regarding a system which is in the state φ?
First of all, we observe that φ was normalized (I.3) by
! +∞
−∞
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk = 1
i.e., (in our present terminology) as a point of the Hilbert space R∞of all


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
f(q1, . . . , qk) with ﬁnite
! +∞
−∞
· · ·
! +∞
−∞
|f(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
(in an FΩ!) it is normalized by ∥φ∥= 1. In other words, it must lie on the
surface of the unit sphere in Hilbert space.117 We already know that a constant
(meaning independent of q1, . . . , qk) factor in φ is physically meaningless. (This
means that the substitution of aφ for φ—a a complex number—is of no physical
consequence.
To preserve normalization it must be the case that |a| = 1.)
Furthermore, it should in this regard be pointed out that while φ is dependent
on time t as well as the coordinates q1, . . . , qk of the conﬁguration space of our
system, nevertheless the Hilbert space involves only the q1, . . . , qk (because the
normalization is related to these alone). Hence the dependence on t is not to
be considered in forming the Hilbert space. Instead of this, it is rather to be
regarded as a parameter. Consequently, φ—as a point in R∞—depends on t
but is, on the other hand, independent of the q1, . . . , qk. Indeed, as a point in
R∞, it represents the entire functional dependence. Because of this, we shall
occasionally indicate the parameter t in φ (when φ is viewed as a point in R∞)
by writing φt.
Let us now consider the state φ = φ(q1, . . . , qk). The statistical assertions
which can be made are as follows: The system is at the point q1, . . . , qk of
the conﬁguration space with the probability density |φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2; i.e., the
probability that it is in the volume V of the conﬁguration space is
!
· · ·
!
V
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dv
(This is one of the ﬁrst and simplest examples by means of which the statistical
character of quantum mechanics was recognized.118 In addition, the relationship
between this statement and Schr¨odinger’s charge distribution assumption
(see I.2) is manifest.) Furthermore, if the energy of the system has the operator
H, and if this operator has eigenvalues λ1, λ2, . . . and eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . ,
then the probability of the energy eigenvalue λn in the state φ is equal to
"""
!
· · ·
!
φ(q1, . . . , qk)φn(q1, . . . , qk) dq1 . . . dqk
"""
(see the papers mentioned in Note 118).
We now want to join these two
statements, and put them in a uniﬁed form.
117 By geometric analogy, the sphere with center φ0 and radius r is (in R∞)
the set of points f with ∥f −φ0∥⩽r, its interior the set with ∥f −φ0∥< r and
its outer surface the set with ∥f −φ0∥= r. For the unit sphere, φ0 = 0, r = 1.
118 The ﬁrst statistical statements of the behavior of a system in the state
φ originated with M. Born, and were treated in more detail by Dirac and by
Jordan. See the references in Note 8 and Note 2.


1. The Statistical Assertions of Quantum Mechanics
Let V be a the k-dimensional cube
q1
′ < q1 ⩽q1
′′
q2
′ < q2 ⩽q2
′′
...
qk
′ < qk ⩽qk
′′
We denote the intervals {q1′, q1′′}, {q2′, q2′′}, . . . , {qk′, qk′′} by I1, I2, . . . , Ik
respectively. The q1, q2, . . . , qk have the operators q1·, q2·, . . . , qk· respectively.
The resolutions of the identity belonging to these operators are deﬁned as
follows (see II.8): we call the resolution belonging to qj· (j = 1, . . . , k) Ej(λ)
and stipulate that
Ej(λ)f(q1, q2, . . . , qk) =



f(q1, q2, . . . , qk)
for
qj ⩽λ
for
qj > λ
We introduce the following general notation: If F(λ) is a resolution of the
identity and I is the interval {λ′, λ′′} then F(I) = F(λ′′) −F(λ′) (which for
λ′ ⩽λ′′, F(λ′) ⩽F(λ′′) is a projection operator). The probability therefore
that the system lies in the above V —i.e., that q1 lies in I1, . . . , qk lies in Ik—is
given by
!
I1
. . .
!
Ik
|φ(q1, . . . , qk)|2dq1 . . . dqk
=
!
· · ·
! ""E1(I1) · · · Ek(Ik)φ(q1, . . . , qk)
""2dq1 . . . dqk
(because E1(I1) · · · Ek(Ik)φ(q1, . . . , qk) = φ(q1, . . . , qk) for q1 in I1, . . . , qk in Ik,
and is otherwise 0); i.e.,
= ∥E1(I1) · · · Ek(Ik)∥2
In the second case, let us consider the probability that the energy lies
in the interval I = {λ′, λ′′}. The resolution of the identity, E(λ), is deﬁned
(see II.8) by
E(λ) =
&
λn ⩽λ
P[φn]
Therefore
E(I) = E(λ′′) −E(λ′) =
&
λ′ <λn ⩽λ′′
P[φn]
But since only theλ1, λ2, . . .appear as values of the energy, this latter probability
is the sum of the probabilities of all λn with λ′ < λn ⩽λ′′. Therefore


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
&
λ′ <λn ⩽λ′′
"""
!
· · ·
!
φ(q1, . . . , qk)φn(q1, . . . , qk) dq1 . . . dqk
"""
=
&
λ′ <λn ⩽λ′′
|(φ, φn)|2
=
&
λ′ <λn ⩽λ′′
(P[φn]φ, φ)
=
'(
&
λ′ <λn ⩽λ′′
P[φn]
)
φ, φ
*
= (E(I)φ, φ) = ∥E(I)φ∥2
In both cases we have then obtained a result which can be formulated as
follows:
P. The probability that in the state φ the operators R1, . . . , Rℓ119
take on values from the respective intervals I1, . . . , Iℓis
∥E1(I1) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ)φ∥2
where E1(λ), . . . , Eℓ(λ) are the resolutions of the identity belonging
to R1, . . . , Rℓrespectively.
The ﬁrst case corresponds to ℓ= k, R1 = q1·, . . . , Rk = qk·, the second to
ℓ= 1, R1 = H. We shall now assume this statement P to be generally valid.
It actually contains all the statistical assertions of quantum mechanics which
have been made thus far.
However, a limitation of its validity is necessary. Since the order of the
R1, . . . , Rℓis entirely arbitrary in the problem, it must be arbitrary in the result.
That is, all the E1(I1), . . . , Eℓ(Iℓ) or equivalently all the E1(λ1), . . . , Eℓ(λℓ) must
commute. By II.10 this means that the R1, . . . , Rℓcommute with each other.
This condition is satisﬁed for q1·, . . . , qk·, while for ℓ= 1, R1 = H it is vacuously
satisﬁed.
Consequently, we postulate P for all commuting R1, . . . , Rℓ.
Then
E1(I1), . . . , Eℓ(Iℓ) commute, so E1(I1) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ) is a projection (theorem 14
in II.4) and the probability in question becomes
P = ∥E1(I1) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ)φ∥2 =
+
E1(I1) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ)φ, φ
,
(theorem 12 in II.4).
119 We shall speak more expressly in IV.1 about this correspondence, which
allows each physical quantity to correspond to a Hermitian operator.
For
the present, we know only (by reason of I.2) that the operators q1·, . . . , qk·
correspond to the coordinates, the operators ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk to the momenta,
and the “energy operator” H to the energy.


1. The Statistical Assertions of Quantum Mechanics
Before we go any further we must verify a few properties of P which must
hold in any reasonable statistical theory.
1◦. The order of the propositions is irrelevant.
2◦. Vacuous propositions can be inserted at will.
These are propositions where the interval Ij = {∞, +∞}, and they give rise
only to a factor Ej(Ij) = Ej(+∞) −Ej(−∞) = I −O = I.
3◦. The addition theorem of probability holds.
That is, if we resolve an interval Ij into two intervals Ij′, Ij′′ then the old
probability is the sum of the two new probabilities. For let Ij, Ij′, Ij′′ be {λ′, λ′′},
{λ′, λ}, {λ, λ′′} respectively. Then
E(λ′′) −E(λ′) =
+
E(λ) −E(λ′)
,
+
+
E(λ′′ −E(λ)
,
i.e., E(Ij) = E(Ij′) + E(Ij′′) which, by reason of the second of the preceding
formulations of P (which is linear in E1(I1) · · · Ej(Ij) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ)) gives the
additivity of the probabilities.
4◦. For absurd propositions (one Ij
empty),
P = 0 because then the
corresponding Ej(Ij) = O. For truly trivial propositions (all Ij = {−∞, +∞}),
P = 1 because then all Ej(Ij) = I, P = ∥φ∥2 = 1. We always have 0 ⩽P ⩽1
because of theorem 13 in II.4.
Finally, we observe that P contains the assertion that a quantity Rj can
take on as values only its eigenvalues; i.e., the numbers of its spectrum. For if
the interval Ij = {λ′, λ′′} lies outside of the spectrum then Ej(λ) is constant in
it, and therefore
Ej(Ij) = Ej(λ′′) −E(λ′) = O
from which it follows that P = 0.
We shall now set ℓ= 1 and denote R1 by R.
Let R be the physical
quantity to which R corresponds (see Note 119). Let F(λ) be any function.
The expectation value of F(R) is then to be calculated.
For this purpose, we divide the interval {−∞, +∞} into a sequence of
subintervals {λn, λn+1}, n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . . The probability that R lies in
{λn, λn+1} is
({E(λn+1) −E(λn)}φ, φ) = (E(λn+1)φ, φ) −(E(λn)φ, φ)
and the expectation value of F(R) is consequently
+∞
&
−∞
F(λ′
n)
-
(E(λn+1)φ, φ) −(E(λn)φ, φ)
.
if λ′
n is an appropriate intermediate value from {λn, λn+1}. But if we choose


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
the subdivisions . . . , λ−2, λ−1, λ0, λ1, λ2, . . . closer and closer together this sum
converges to the Stieltjes integral
! +∞
−∞
F(λ) d(E(λ)φ, φ)
which therefore provides a description of the expectation value in question. But
by reason of the general deﬁnition of operator functions in II.8 this integral is
equal to (F(R)φ, φ). Consequently, we have
E1. Let R be any physical quantity, R its operator (see Note 119),
and F(λ) an arbitrary function. Then, for the expectation value of
F(R) in the state φ, we have
Exp(F(R); φ) = (F(R)φ, φ)
In particular, if we set F(λ) = λ, then:
E2. Let R, R be as above. Then for the expectation value of R in
the state φ, we have
Exp(R; φ) = (Rφ, φ)
We look now to the relations among P, E1 and E2. We shall deduce E1
from P and E2 from E1.
Let the operator that corresponds to the physical quantity F(R) be
denoted S. Then a comparison of E1, E2 gives
(Sφ, φ) = (F(R)φ, φ)
for all states φ; i.e., for all φ with ∥φ∥= 1. Consequently, in general,
(Sf, f) = (F(R)f, f)
(obvious for f = 0, while otherwise φ =
∥f∥·f) and therefore
(Sf, g) = (F(R)f, g)
(replace f by f+g
else by f−g
and subtract; this gives equality of the real parts;
if, g instead of f, g gives equality of the imaginary parts). Therefore S = F(R).
We formulate this important result as follows:
F. If the quantity R has the operator R, then the quantity F(R)
must have the operator F(R).


1. The Statistical Assertions of Quantum Mechanics
Because of F, now E1 clearly follows from E2. Consequently (under the
assumption of F), E1 and E2 are equivalent assertions, and we shall now show
that they are also equivalent to P. Since they follow from P we need only show
that P follows from E1 or E2.
Let R1, . . . , Rℓbe commuting operators belonging to the respective
quantities R1, . . . , Rℓ.
By II.10 they are functions of a Hermitian operator
R:
R1 = F1(R),
. . .
, Rℓ= Fℓ(R)
We may assume that R also belongs to a quantity R. (We therefore make the
assumption that a (hypermaximal) operator R belongs to each R and conversely.
See Note 119 and IV.2.) Then, by F,
R1 = F1(R),
. . .
, Rℓ= Fℓ(R)
Now let I1, . . . , Iℓbe the intervals involved in P, and let Gj(λ) be deﬁned
Gj(λ) =
( 1
for λ in Ij
:
j = 1, . . . , ℓ
otherwise
We set
H(λ) = G1(F1(λ)) · · · Gℓ(Fℓ(λ))
and form the quantity
S = H(R)
If Rj lies in Ij —i.e., if Fj(R) lies in Ij —then Gj(Fj(R)) equals 1,
otherwise it equals 0.
S = H(R) is therefore equal to 1 if each Rj lies in
its Ij (j = 1, . . . , ℓ), and is otherwise equal to 0. The expectation value of S
is therefore equal to the probability P that R1 lies in I1, . . . , Rℓlies in Iℓ.,
Hence
P = Exp(S, φ) = (H(R)φ, φ)
= (G1(F1(R)) · · · Gℓ(Fℓ(R))φ, φ)
= (G1(R1) · · · Gℓ(Rℓ)φ, φ)
Let the resolution of the identity belonging to Rj again be called Ej(λ), and let
Ij be the interval {λ′
j, λ′′
j }. Then, by reason of the discussion at the end of II.8,
and with the notation used there,
Gj(λ) = eλ′′
j (λ) −eλ′
j(λ)
Gj(Rj) = eλ′′
j (Rj) −eλ′
j(Rj)
= Ej(λ′′
j ) −Ej(λ′
j) = Ej(Ij)
we have
P = (E1(I1) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ)φ, φ)
But this is precisely P.
Because of the simplicity of their form, E2, F are especially suited to be
considered as the foundations upon which the entire theory is built. We saw
that P—the most general probability assertion possible—follows from these.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
But the statement P has two striking features:
1. P is statistical, and not causal; i.e., it does not tell us what values R1, . . . , Rℓ
have in the states φ, but only with what probabilities they take on all possible
values.
2. The problem of P cannot be answered for arbitrary quantities R1, . . . , Rℓ,
but only for those whose operators R1, . . . , Rℓcommute with one another.
Our next problem is to discuss the signiﬁcance of these two facts.
2. THE STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION
Classical mechanics is a causal discipline; i.e., if we know exactly the
state of a classical system—for which, with k degrees of freedom, 2k numbers
are necessary: the k space coordinates q1, . . . , qk and their k time derivatives
∂q1/∂t, . . . . , ∂qk/∂t or, in place of these, the k momenta p1, . . . , pk—then we can
give the value of each physical quantity (energy, torque, etc.) uniquely and with
numerical exactness.
Nevertheless, there also exists a statistical method
for approaching classical mechanical problems, but this is, as it were, a luxury or
extra addition. That is, if we do not know all 2k variables q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk
but only several of them (and some of those perhaps only approximately), we—
by averaging over the unknown variables—may at least be able to formulate
statistical assertions about the physical quantities of interest. The same holds
for the preceding or subsequent states of the system: if we know q1, . . . , qk,
p1, . . . , pk at time t = t0 then, by means of the classical equations of motion,
we can calculate (causally) the state for every other time; but if we know only
some of the variables we must average over the rest, and we can then make only
statistical statements about the state at other times.120
The statistical statements which we found in quantum mechanics have a
diﬀerent character. Here, for k degrees of freedom, the state is described by the
wave function φ(q1, . . . , qk); i.e., by a point φ in R∞, suitably realized (∥φ∥= 1,
and a numerical factor of absolute value 1 is unimportant).
Although we
believe that after having speciﬁed φ we know the state of the system completely,
nevertheless only statistical statements can be made concerning the values of
the physical quantities involved.
120 The kinetic theory of gases furnishes a good illustration of the points at
issue. A mole (32 g) of oxygen contains 6 · 1023 oxygen molecules, and, if we
observe that each oxygen molecule is composed of two oxygen atoms (whose
inner structure we shall neglect, so that they can be treated as mass points with
three degrees of freedom), one such mole is a system with 2·3·6·1023 = 36·1023 = k
degrees of freedom.
Its behavior can therefore be described causally by 2k
variables, but gas theory uses only two: pressure and temperature, which are
certain complicated functions of these 2k independent variables. Consequently,
only statistical (probability) observations can be made. That these are in many
cases nearly causal (i.e., the probabilities are near 0 or 1) does not alter the
fundamental nature of the situation.


2. The Statistical Interpretation
On the other hand, this statistical character is limited to statements about
the values of physical quantities, while the preceding and subsequent states
φt can be calculated causally from φt0 = φ. The time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation (see I.2) makes this possible:
φt0 = φ
:
ℏ
i
∂
∂tφt = −Hφt
determine the entire path of φt. The solution of this diﬀerential equation can
be explicitly rendered
φt = e−i
ℏ(t−t0)Hφ
where the operator e−i
ℏ(t−t0)H is unitary.121 (In this formula H was assumed
to be independent of time, but even with a time-dependent H the evolved state
φt is uniquely determined, since the diﬀerential equation is of ﬁrst degree. In
this case, however, there are no simple solution formulas.)
If we want to explain the non-causal character of the connection between φ
and the values of physical quantities following the pattern of classical
mechanics, then this interpretation is clearly the proper one: In reality, φ
does not determine the state exactly. In order to know this state absolutely,
additional numerical data are necessary.
That is, the system has other
characteristics or coordinates in addition to φ. If we were to know all of these we
could then give the values of all physical quantities exactly and with certainty.
On the other hand, with the use of φ alone, just as in classical mechanics when
only some of the q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk are known, only statistical statements are
possible. Of course, this concept is only hypothetical. It is an attempt whose
utility depends upon whether or not it actually succeeds in ﬁnding the additional
coordinates contributing to φ, and in building, with their help, a causal theory
which is in agreement with experiment, and which gives the statistical assertions
of quantum mechanics when only φ is given (and an averaging is performed over
the other coordinates).
121 If Ft(λ) is a time-dependent function, ∂
∂tFt(λ) = Gt(λ) and H is a Hermitian
operator, then ∂
∂tFt(H) = Gt(H) because ∂
∂t is obtained by subtraction, division
and passage to the limit. For
Ft(λ) = e−i
ℏ(t−t0)λ
this gives
∂
∂te−i
ℏ(t−t0)H = −i
ℏH · e−i
ℏ(t−t0)H
which yields the desired diﬀerential equation when applied to φ.
Because |Ft(λ)| = 1, Ft(λ) · Ft(λ) = 1 we have Ft(H) · [Ft(H)]∗= 1; i.e.,
our
Ft(H) = e−i
ℏ(t−t0)H
is unitary. Since it is obviously I at t = t0, φt0 = φ is also satisﬁed.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
It is customary to call these hypothetical additional coordinates “hidden
parameters” or “hidden coordinates,” since they must play a hidden role, in
addition to the φ which alone have been uncovered by investigation thus far.
Explanations by means of hidden parameters have (in classical mechanics)
reduced many apparently statistical relations to the causal foundations of
mechanics. An example of this is the kinetic theory of gases (see Note 120).
Whether or not an explanation of this type, by means of hidden parameters,
is possible for quantum mechanics is a much discussed question. The view that
it will sometime be answered in the aﬃrmative has at present some prominent
representatives. If it were correct, it would brand the present form of the theory
provisional, since then the description of states would be essentially incomplete.
We shall show later (IV.2) that an introduction of hidden parameters is
certainly not possible without a basic change in the present theory. For the
present, let us emphasize only these two things: (1) φ has an entirely diﬀerent
appearance and role from the q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk
complex in classical
mechanics, and (2) the time dependence of φ is causal and not statistical: φt0
determines all φt uniquely, as we saw above.
Until a more precise analysis of the statements of quantum mechanics
enables us to prove objectively the possibility of introducing hidden parameters
(a problem discussed in the place quoted above), we shall abandon this possible
explanation. We therefore adopt the opposite point of view. That is, we admit
as a fact that the natural laws which govern elementary processes (i.e., the
laws of quantum mechanics) are of a statistical nature.
(The causality of
the macroscopic world can in any event be simulated by the leveling action
which is manifest whenever many elementary processes operate simultaneously;
i.e., by the “law of large numbers.” See the remarks at the end of Note 120
and Note 175.) Accordingly, we recognize P (or E2) as the most far reaching
pronouncement on elementary processes.
This concept of quantum mechanics, which accepts its statistical expression
as the actual form of the laws of nature, and which abandons the principle of
causality, is the so-called “statistical interpretation.” It is due to M. Born,122
and is the only consistently enforceable interpretation of quantum mechanics
today—i.e., of the sum of our experience relative to elementary processes. It
is this interpretation to which we shall conform in the following (until we can
proceed to a detailed and fundamental discussion of the situation).
3. SIMULTANEOUS MEASURABILITY
AND MEASURABILITY IN GENERAL
The second of the “striking” circumstances to which we drew attention
at the end of III.1 was connected with the fact that P provided information not
122 Z. Physik 37 (1926). The entire subsequent development (see Note 2) rests
on this concept.


3. Simultaneous Measurability
only about the probabilities with which a quantity R took on given numerical
values, but also about the probability interrelations of several quantities
R1, . . . , Rℓ. P speciﬁed the probability that these quantities took on certain
given values simultaneously (more precisely: that these quantities lay in certain
intervals I1, . . . , Iℓ, the presumption being that all refer to the same state φ).
But these quantities R1, . . . , Rℓwere subject to a characteristic limitation: their
operators R1, . . . , Rℓhad to commute pairwise. In the case of non-commuting
R1, . . . , Rℓon the other hand, P gave no information regarding the probability
interrelations of the R1, . . . , Rℓ. In this case, P could be used only to determine
the probability distribution of each of these quantities by itself, without
consideration of the others.
The most obvious remedy would be to assume that this reﬂects an
incompleteness in P, and that there must exist a more general formula which
gives back P as a special case. Because even if quantum mechanics furnishes
only statistical information regarding nature, the least we can expect of it is
that it describes not only the statistics of individual quantities, but also the
relations among several such quantities.
But—contrary to this concept, which appears reasonable at ﬁrst glance—
we shall soon see that such a generalization of P is not possible, and that, in
addition to the formal reasons (intrinsic to the structure of the mathematical
tools of thetheory),weighty physical grounds also suggest this type of limitation.
The necessity of this limitation and its physical meaning will give us an
important insight into the nature of elementary processes.
In order to be clear on this point we must investigate more precisely
what the process of measurement of a quantity R—about which P makes a
(probability) statement—means quantum mechanically.
First, let us refer to an important experiment which Compton and Simon
carried out prior to the formulation of quantum mechanics.123
In this
experiment, light was scattered by electrons, and the scattering process was
controlled in such a way that the scattered light and scattered electrons were
subsequently intercepted, and their energy and momenta measured. That is,
there ensued collisions between light quanta and electrons, and the observer,
since he measured the paths after collision, could determine whether or not
the laws of elastic collision were satisﬁed.
(We need consider only elastic
collisions, since we do not believe that energy can be absorbed by electrons
and light quanta in any form other than as kinetic energy. According to all
experiments, both appear to have uniquely constituted structures. The collision
calculation
must
naturally
be
carried
out
relativistically.123)
Such
a
mathematical calculation was in fact possible because the paths before collision
were known, and those after the collision were observed. Therefore the collision
problem was entirely determined.
In order to determine the process
123 Phys. Rev. 26 (1925). See also the comprehensive treatment of Bothe in
Handbuch der Physik, Vol. 23 (“Quanta”), Berlin, 1926, Chapter 3, particularly
§73.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
mechanically, two of these four paths, and the “central line” of the collision (the
direction of momentum transfer) suﬃces. In any case, therefore, knowledge of
three paths is suﬃcient, and the fourth acts as a check. The experiment gave
complete conﬁrmation of the mechanical laws of collision.
This result can also be formulated as follows, provided we admit the validity
of the laws of collision, and regard the paths before collision as known. The
measurement of either the light quantum or the electron after collision suﬃces
to determine the position and the central line of the collision. The Compton-
Simon experiment now shows that these two observations give the same result.
More generally, the experiment shows that the same physical quantity
(namely, any coordinate of the place of collision or of the central line) is
measured in two diﬀerent ways (by capture of the light quantum and of the
electron), and the result is always the same.
These two measurements do not occur entirely simultaneously. The light
quantum and the electron do not arrive at once, and by suitable arrangement
of the measurement apparatus either process may be observed ﬁrst. The time
diﬀerence is usually about 10−9 to 10−10 seconds. We call the ﬁrst measurement
M1 and the second M2. R is the quantity measured. We then have the following
situation: Although the entire arrangement is of such a type that, prior to
the measurement, we can make only statistical statements regarding R, i.e.,
regarding M1, M2 (see the reference in Note 123), the statistical correlation
between M1 and M2 is perfectly sharp (causal): the R value of M1 is certainly
equal to that of M2. Before the measurements of M1, M2, therefore, both results
were completely undetermined; after M1 has been performed (but not M2) the
result of M2 is already determined, causally and uniquely.
We can formulate the principle that is involved as follows: by nature,
three degrees of causality or non-causality may be distinguished. First, the R
value could be entirely statistical; i.e., the result of a measurement could be
predicted only statistically,and if a second measurement were made immediately
after the ﬁrst one this would also have a dispersion, without regard to the value
found initially; for example, its dispersion might be equal to the original one.124
Second, it is conceivable that the value of R may have a dispersion in the ﬁrst
measurement, but that immediately subsequent measurement is constrained to
give a result which agrees with that of the ﬁrst. Third, R could be determined
causally at the outset.
The Compton-Simon experiment shows that only the second case is
possible in a statistical theory. Therefore, if the system is initially found in a
state in which the values of R cannot be predicted with certainty, then this state
is transformed by the measurement M of R (in the example above, M1) into
124 A statistical theory of elementary processes was erected by Bohr, Kramers
and Slater on these basic concepts. See Z. Physik 24 (1924), as well as the
references cited in Note 123. The Compton-Simon experiment serves to refute
this view.


3. Simultaneous Measurability
another state: namely, into one in which the value of R is uniquely determined.
Moreover, the new state, into which M places the system, depends not only
upon the arrangement of M but also upon the result of the measurement M
(which could not be predicted causally in the original state), because the value
of R in this new state must actually be equal to this M-result.
Now let R be a quantity whose operator R has a pure discrete spectrum
λ1, λ2, . . . with the respective eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . which then form a
complete orthonormal set.
In addition, let each eigenvalue be simple (i.e.,
of multiplicity 1: see II.6); i.e., λµ ̸= λν for µ ̸= ν. Let us assume that we have
measured R and found the value λ∗. What is the state of the system after the
measurement?
By virtue of the foregoing discussion, this state must be such that a
new measurement of
R gives the result λ∗with certainty. (Of course, this
measurement must be made immediately because after τ seconds φ has changed
to
e−i
ℏτ Hφ
See III.2; H is the energy operator.)
This question, as to when the measurement of R in the state φ gives
the value λ∗with certainty, we shall now answer in general, without limiting
assumptions on the operator R.
Let E(λ) be the resolution of the identity corresponding to R, and I an
interval {λ′, λ′′}. Our assumption can also be formulated this way: that R lies
in I with probability 0 if this does not contain λ∗, and with probability 1 if
I does contain λ∗; i.e., if λ′ < λ∗⩽λ′′.
By P this means that ∥E(I)φ∥2 = 1 or (since ∥φ∥= 1) ∥E(I)φ∥= ∥φ∥.
Since E(I) is a projection, and I −E(I) is also (theorem 13, II.4), we have
∥φ −E(I)φ∥= ∥φ∥2 −∥E(I)φ∥2 = 0
φ −E(I)φ = 0
E(λ′′)φ −E(λ′)φ = E(I)φ = φ
λ′ →−∞gives E(λ′′)φ = φ while λ′′ →+∞gives E(λ′)φ = 0 (see S1, II.7).
Therefore
E(λ)φ =
( φ
for
λ ⩾λ∗
for
λ < λ∗
But by II.8 this is characteristic for Rφ = λ∗φ.
Another way of proving Rφ = λ∗φ rests on E1 (i.e., E2). That R has the
value λ∗with certainty means that (R−λ∗)2 has the expectation value 0. That
is, the operator F(R) = (R −λ∗I)2 obtained from F(λ) = (λ −λ∗)2 has that
expectation value. We must then have
((R −λ∗I)2φ, φ) = ((R −λ∗I)φ, (R −λ∗I)φ) = ∥(R −λ∗I)φ∥2
= ∥R φ −λ∗φ∥2 = 0
i.e., Rφ = λ∗φ.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
For the special case that we considered originally we thus have Rφ = λ∗φ.
As discussed in II.6, this has the consequence that λ∗must be equal to λµ
(because ∥φ∥= 1, φ ̸= 0) and φ = aφµ. Since ∥φ∥= ∥φµ∥= 1, |a| must
equal 1, and therefore a can be neglected without altering the state. Therefore:
λ∗= λµ, φ = φµ for some µ = 1, 2, . . . . (The λ∗-assertion could have been
obtained directly from P, but not the assertion regarding φ!)
Under the above assumptions on R, a measurement of R then has the
consequence of changing the state ψ into one of the states φ1, φ2, . . . which
are connected with the respective results of measurement λ1, λ2, . . . .
The
probabilities of these changes are therefore equal to the measurement
probabilities for λ1, λ2, . . . , and can therefore be calculated from P.
The probability that the value of R lies in I is then ∥E(I)ψ∥2 by P. Hence,
if we observe that by II.8 E(I) = /
λnin I P[φn], we have
P = ∥E(I)ψ∥2 = (E(I)ψ, ψ) =
&
λn inI
(P[ψn]ψ, ψ) =
&
λn inI
|(ψ, φn)|2
One should therefore suspect that the probability for λn equals |(ψ, φn)|2. If
we can so choose I that it contains a unique λm which is just λn, then this
follows directly from the above formula. Otherwise (i.e., if the other λm are
dense near λn) we can, for example, argue as follows: let F(λ) = 1 for λ = λn
and be otherwise 0. Then the desired probability Pn is the expectation value
of F(R), and hence by E2 (or E1) is (F(R)ψ, ψ). Now by deﬁnition
(F(R)ψ, ψ) =
! +∞
−∞
F(λ) d(∥E(λ)ψ∥2)
and if we recall the deﬁnition of the Stieltjes integral we can easily see that this
equals 0 if E(λ) is continuous (in λ) for λ = λn, and in general the discontinuity
for the (monotonic increasing) λ-function ∥E(λ)ψ∥2 is at the point λ = λn. But
this is equal to ∥PM ψ∥2, where M is the closed linear manifold spanned by all
solutions of Rψ = λnψ (see II.8). In the present case, M = [φn] and therefore
Pn = ∥P[φn]ψ∥2 = |(ψ, φn)|2
We have then answered the question as to what happens in the measurement
of a quantity R under the above assumptions for its operator R. To be sure, the
“how” remains unexplained for the present. This discontinuous transition from
ψ to one of the states φ1, φ2, . . . (which are independent of ψ because ψ enters
only into the respective probabilities Pn = |(ψ, φn)|2, n = 1, 2, . . .) is certainly
not of the type described by the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation. This
latter always results in a continuous change of ψ, in which the ﬁnal result is
uniquely determined and is dependent on ψ (see the discussion in III.2). We
shall attempt to bridge this chasm later (see VI).125
125 That these jumps are related to the “quantum jumps” concept of the older
Bohr theory was recognized by Jordan; Z. Physik 40 (1924).


3. Simultaneous Measurability
Let us retain the assumption that R has a pure discrete spectrum but
abandon the requirement that the eigenvalues are simple. Then we can again
form the φ1, φ2, . . . and λ1, λ2, . . . , but duplications may now occur among
the λn. After a measurement of R a state φ with Rφ = λ∗φ is certainly present
(λ∗is the result of the measurement). As a consequence, λ∗is equal to one of
the λn, but we can say only the following of φ: let those λn that equal λ∗be
λn1, λn2, . . . (their number may be either ﬁnite or inﬁnite). Then
φ =
&
ν
aνφν
(If there are inﬁnitely many nν then /
ν |aν|2 must be ﬁnite.) Two such φ
represent the same state if they diﬀer by no more than a numerical factor; i.e., if
the ratio a1 : a2 : · · · is the same. Therefore, as soon as more than one nν exists;
i.e., if the eigenvalue λ∗is multiple, then the state φ after the measurement is
not uniquely determined by knowledge of the result of the measurement.
We calculate the probability of λ∗(by P or E1 or E2) exactly as before. It
is
P(λ∗) =
&
λn=λ∗
|(ψ, φn)|2 =
&
ν
|(ψ, φnν)|2
If R has no pure discrete spectrum the situation is this: All solutions f of
Rf = λf span a closed linear manifold Mλ; all Mλ together form an additional
M, and it is characteristic for the non-existence of a pure discrete spectrum
that M ̸= R∞; i.e., that R = R∞−M ̸= O. (See II.8 for this, as well as for
what follows.) Mλ is at best ̸= O for a sequence of λ. These form the discrete
spectrum of R. If we measure R in the state ψ then the probability that the
result of the measurement will be λ∗is
P(λ∗) = ∥PMλ∗ψ∥2 = (PMλ∗ψ, ψ)
This is best proved by the line of argument used above, which is based on E2
(or E1) and on the function
F(λ) =
for
λ = λ∗
for
λ ̸= λ∗
The probability that the value of R will be some λ∗of the discrete spectrum Λ
of R is then
P =
&
λ∗inΛ
(PMλ∗ψ, ψ) = (PM ψ, ψ) = ∥PM ψ∥2
which we can also see directly with the aid of the function
F(λ) =
( 1
for
λ∗from Λ
otherwise


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
However, if we measure R exactly, then afterwards a state φ with Rφ = λ∗φ
must be present, and therefore the result of measurement must belong to Λ; the
probability of obtaining an exact measurement is therefore (at most) ∥PM ψ∥2.
But this number is not always 1, and for ψ of R it is in fact 0; therefore an
exact measurement is not always possible.
We have seen that a quantity R can always (i.e., for each state ψ) be
measured exactly if and only if it possesses a pure discrete spectrum.
If it
possesses none, then it can be measured with only limited accuracy; i.e., the
number continuum can be divided into intervals
. . . , I(−2), I(−1), I(0), I(+1), I(+2), . . .
(Let the division points be
. . . , λ(−2), λ(−1), λ(0), λ(+1), λ(+2), . . .
:
I(n) = {λ(n), λ(n+1)}
The maximum interval-length ϵ = Max(λ(n+1) −λ(n))—the maximal spacing
of the division points—is then the measure of accuracy.) The interval in which
R lies can be determined by a process which we pursue mathematically: Let
F(λ) be the following function (λ′
n is some intermediate value from I(n), which
is arbitrary for each n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . but will be considered to be ﬁxed):
F(λ) = λ′
n if λ lies in I(n)
Then
the
approximate
measurement
of
R
is
equivalent
to
the
exact
measurement of F(R). Now
F(R) =
! +∞
−∞
F(λ)dE(λ) =
+∞
&
n=−∞
! λ(n+1)
λ(n)
F(λ)dE(λ)
=
+∞
&
n=−∞
λ′
n
! λ(n+1)
λ(n)
dE(λ) =
+∞
&
n=−∞
λ′
nE(I(n))
The equation F(R)f = λ′
nf clearly holds for all f of the closed linear manifold
belonging to E(I(n)); i.e., to F(R)Mλ′
n, which contains that closed manifold.
Consequently
PMλ′n ⩾E(I(n))
and therefore
PM ⩾
∞
&
n=−∞
PMλ′
n ⩾
∞
&
n=−∞
E(I(n))
=
∞
&
n=−∞
+
E(λ(n+1)) −E(λ(n))
,
= I −O = I
From this it follows that
∞
&
n=−∞
PMλ′n = PM = I,
PMλ′n = E(I(n))
i.e., that F(R) has a pure discrete spectrum, and that this consists of λ′
n.


3. Simultaneous Measurability
Therefore F(R) is exactly measurable, and the probability that its value
is λ′
n—i.e., that the value of R lies in I(n)—is
∥PMλ′
nψ∥2 = ∥E(I(n))ψ∥2
in agreement with the statement P for R.
This result can also be interpreted physically, and it demonstrates that the
theory is in good agreement with the ordinary intuitive physical point of view.
In the method of observation of classical mechanics (without any quantum
conditions) we assign to each quantity R in each state a completely
determined value.
At the same time, however, we recognize that every
conceivable measuring apparatus, as a consequence of the imperfections of
human means of observation (which result in the reading of the position of a
pointer, or of locating the blackening of a photographic plate, with only limited
accuracy), can furnish this value only with a certain (never vanishing) margin
of error. This margin of error can, by suﬃcient reﬁnement of the method of
measurement, be made arbitrarily close to zero—but it is never exactly zero.
One expects that this will also be true in quantum theory for those quantities
R which, according to the pictures that were customarily made of such things
(especially before the discovery of quantum mechanics), are not quantized; this
expectation pertains, for example, to the cartesian coordinates of an electron
(which can take on every value between −∞and +∞, and whose operators have
continuous spectra). On the other hand, for those quantities which (according
to our intuitive picture of them) are “quantized” the reverse is true: since these
are capable of assuming only discrete values it suﬃces to observe them with just
suﬃcient precision that no doubt can exist as to which of these “quantized”
values is occurring. That value is then as good as “observed” with absolute
precision. For example, if we know of a hydrogen atom that it contains less
energy than is necessary for the second-lowest energy level, then we know its
energy content with absolute precision: it is in the lowest energy state.
This division into quantized and unquantized quantities corresponds, as the
analysis of the matrix theory has already shown (see I.2 and II.6), to the division
of quantities R with operators R which do/don’t have pure discrete spectra.
It was for the former—and only for those—that we found measurements of
absolute precision to be possible; the latter, we found, can be observed only
with arbitrarily good (but never absolute) precision.126
In addition, it should be observed that the introduction of an eigenfunction
which is “improper”—i.e., which does not belong to Hilbert space (mentioned
in the preface as well as in I.3; see also II.8, especially the Notes 84, 86)—gives
126 In all such cases we make the supposition that the structure of the observed
system—and of the measuring apparatus (i.e., all the ambient force ﬁelds,
etc.)—is known exactly, and that only the state (i.e., the values of the
coordinates) is sought.
If these (idealized) assumptions do not prove to be
correct then additional sources of indeterminacy are of course present.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
a less good approach to reality than our treatment here. For such a method
assumes the existence of states in which quantities with continuous spectra
take on certain values exactly, although this never occurs.
Although such
idealizations have often been advanced, we believe that it is necessary to discard
them on these grounds, additional to the grounds provided by the fact of their
mathematical untenability.
With this we have brought to a tentative conclusion our discussion of the
processes which occur in the measurement of a single quantity, and can apply
ourselves to the problems posed by the simultaneous measurement of several
quantities.
First, let R, S be two quantities with the respective operators R, S. We
shall assume that they are simultaneously measurable. What follows from this?
We begin by assuming exact measurability so that R, S must have pure
discrete spectra: λ1, λ2, . . . and µ1, µ2, . . . respectively. Let the corresponding
complete orthonormal sets of eigenfunctions be φ1, φ2, . . . and ψ1, ψ2, . . . .
In order to discuss the simplest case ﬁrst, we shall assume that one of the
operators—say R —has simple eigenvalues; i.e., λm ̸= λn for m ̸= n.
If we measure R, S simultaneously then a state is subsequently present
in which R as well as S has the previously measured values with certainty.
These values are (say) λ ¯m, λ¯n. The state which then exists must satisfy the
relations Rψ = λ ¯mψ, Sψ = λ¯nψ. From the ﬁrst of these if follows that ψ = φ ¯m
(except for a numerical factor which we can neglect), while from the second
ψ = !
ν aνψnν if µn1, µn2, . . . are all µn equal to µ¯n. If the initial state was
φ then λ ¯m, φ ¯m has the probability |(φ, φ ¯m)|2. For φ = φm therefore ¯m = m
is certain, so that we can say for each m that φm can be developed !
ν aνψnν
with equal µnν; i.e., Sφm = ¯µφm with ¯µ = µn1 = µn2 = · · · . For f = φm
consequently RSf = SRf (both are equal to λm¯µ · φm). Therefore this also
holds for these; i.e., for all f. Therefore R, S commute.
If R, S are not continuous then we argue as follows: The resolutions of the
identity E(λ), F(µ) belonging to R, S are deﬁned by
E(λ) =
"
λm ⩽λ
P[φm],
F(µ) =
"
µn ⩽µ
P[ψn]
Consequently
E(λ)φm =
#
φm
for
λ ⩾λm
for
λ < λm
F(µ)φm =
#
φm
for
µ ⩾¯µ
for
µ < ¯µ
Therefore in any case E(λ)F(µ)φm= F(µ)E(λ)φm for all φm. The commutativity
of E(λ), F(µ) follows from this, just as above, and therefore (by II.10) also the
commutativity of R, S.


3. Simultaneous Measurability
But according to
II.10 there exists a complete orthonormal set of
eigenfunctions common to R, S; i.e., we may assume φm = ψm. Since λm ̸= λn
for m ̸= n, we can set up a function F(λ) with
F(λ) =
#
µn
for
λ = λn : n = 1, 2, . . .
arbitrary elsewhere
Then S = F(R); i.e., S = F(R).
That is: R, S are not only measurable
simultaneously but each measurement of R is also one of S, since S is a function
of R; i.e., is determined causally by R.127
We now proceed to the more general case where nothing is assumed
concerning the multiplicity of the eigenvalues of R, S. In this case we use an
essentially diﬀerent method.
First let us consider the quantity R + S. A simultaneous measurement
of R, S is also a measurement of R + S because addition of the results of the
measurements gives the value of R + S. Consequently, the expectation value of
R + S in each state ψ is the sum of the expectation values of R and of S. It
should be noted that this holds independently of whether R, S are statistically
independent, or whether (and which) correlations exist between them, because
the law
Expectation value of the sum = Sum of the expectation values
holds in general, as is well known. Therefore, if T is the operator of R + S then
this expectation value is on the one hand (Tψ, ψ) and on the other
(Rψ, ψ) + (Sψ, ψ) = ((R + S)ψ, ψ)
i.e., for all ψ
(Tψ, ψ) = ((R + S)ψ, ψ)
Therefore T = R + S.
Consequently R + S has the operator R + S.128
In
the same way we can show that aR + bS (a, b real numbers) has the operator
aR+bS. (This also follows from the ﬁrst formula if we substitute R, S and R, S
in the functions F(λ) = aλ, G(µ) = bµ.)
A simultaneous measurement of R, S is also a measurement of
R + S
,
$R + S
%2
,
R −S
,
$R −S
%2
$R + S
%2
−
$R −S
%2
= R · S
127 The latter proposition can be veriﬁed with the aid of P. The resolutions of
the identity which belong to R and S may be formed by II.8.
128 We have proved this law, according to which the operator of R + S is the
sum of the operators of R and S, for simultaneously measurable R, S. See what
is said at the end of IV.1 and IV.2.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
Operators of these quantities (if we also make use of the fact that if T is the
operator of T then F(T) is the operator of F(T ) and hence T 2 has the operator
T2 ) are therefore
R + S
,
$R + S
%2
= R2 + S2 + RS + SR
R −S
,
$R −S
%2
= R2 + S2 −RS −SR
$R + S
%2
−
$R −S
%2
= RS + SR
That is, R· S has the operator 1
2(RS + SR). This also holds for all F(R), F(S)
(which are also measured), and therefore F(R) · G(S) has the operator
F(R) G(S) + G(S) F(R)
Now let E(λ), F(µ) be the resolutions of the identity corresponding to R, S.
Furthermore, let
F(λ) =
#
for
λ ⩽¯λ
for
λ > ¯λ
:
G(µ) =
#
for
µ ⩽¯µ
for
µ > ¯µ
As we know, F(R) = E(¯λ), G(S) = F(¯µ) so F(R) · G(S) has the operator
2(EF + FE) (for brevity we replace E(¯λ), F(¯µ) by E, F). Since F(R) is always
either 0 or 1 we have F(R)2 = F(R) and therefore
F(R) ·
&
F(R) · G(S)
'
= F(R) · G(S)
Let us now apply our multiplication formula to F(R) and F(R) · G(S) (both
of which are simultaneously measurable). We then obtain the operator
E EF + FE
+ EF + FE
E
= E2F + 2EFE + FE2
= EF + FE + 2EFE
for this product. This must equal 1
2(EF + FE), from which it follows that
EF + FE = 2 · EFE
Multiplication on the left by E gives
E2F + EFE = 2 · E2FE,
EF + EFE = 2 · EFE,
EF = EFE
while multiplication on the right by E gives
EFE + FE2 = 2 · EFE2,
EFE + FE = 2 · EFE,
FE = EFE
Therefore EF = FE. That is, all E(¯λ), F(¯µ) commute. Consequently R, S again
commute.


3. Simultaneous Measurability
It was established in II.10 that the requirement that R, S be commutative
is the same as the requirement that there exists a Hermitian operator T of
which R and S are functions: R = F(T), S = G(T). If this operator belongs
to the quantity T then R = F(T ), S = G(T ).
However, this condition is
also suﬃcient for simultaneous measurability, because a measurement of T (an
absolutely exact one because T has a pure discrete spectrum: see II.10) measures
simultaneously the functions R, S. The commutativity of R, S is therefore a
necessary and suﬃcient condition.
If several variables R, S, . . .(but a ﬁnite number)are given,if their operators
are R, S, . . . and if absolutely exact measurement is again required, then the
situation with regard to simultaneous measurability is as follows. If all quantities
R, S, . . . are simultaneously measurable then all pairs formed from them must
also be simultaneously measurable. That is, all operators R, S, . . . must commute
pairwise. Conversely, if all R, S, . . . commute with each other then by II.10 there
exists an operator T of which all are functions: R = F(T), S = G(T), . . . .
And therefore the corresponding T : R = F(T ), S = G(T ), . . . .
An exact
measurement of T (T has again a pure discrete spectrum: see again II.10) is
consequently a simultaneous measurement ofR, S, . . . That is,the commutativity
of R, S, . . . is necessary and suﬃcient for the simultaneous measurability of
R, S, . . . .
Now let us consider such measurements which are not absolutely exact,
but only of some (arbitrarily great) previously given accuracy. Then R, S, . . .
no longer need have discrete spectra.
Since the limited accuracy measurements of R, S, . . . are in eﬀect the same
as absolutely exact measurements of F(R), G(S), . . . , where F(λ), G(λ), . . . are
certain functions the manner of whose formation was described at the beginning
of this section (in the discussion of a single measurement, of course, only F(λ)
was given), we can infer that R, S, . . . are certainly measurable simultaneously if
all the F(R), G(S), . . . are measurable simultaneously (with, of course, absolute
accuracy). But the latter is equivalent to the commutativity of F(R), G(S), . . . ,
and this follows from that of R, S, . . . . Therefore the commutativity of R, S, . . .
is in any case suﬃcient.
Conversely, if R, S, . . . are taken to be simultaneously measurable, then we
proceed as follows.
A suﬃciently exact measurement of R permits us to
determine whether its value is > ¯λ or ⩽¯λ (see our deﬁnition of “limited
accuracy,” discussed in Note 126). So if F(λ) is deﬁned
F(λ) =
#
for
λ ⩽¯λ
for
λ > ¯λ
then F(R) is measurable with absolute accuracy. Correspondingly, if
G(µ) =
#
for
µ ⩽¯µ
for
µ > ¯µ


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
then G(S) is measurable with absolute accuracy, and moreover: both quantities
are measurable simultaneously. Therefore R(R), G(S) commute. Now let E(λ)
and F(µ) be the resolutions of the identity belonging to R, S. Then F(R) = E(¯λ),
G(S) = F(¯µ) and therefore E(¯λ), F(¯µ) commute (for all ¯λ, ¯µ). Consequently,
R, S commute. And, since this must hold for each pair of operators R, S, all
R, S must commute pairwise. Therefore this condition is also necessary.
We therefore see that the characteristic conditions for the simultaneous
measurability of a (ﬁnite) number of quantities R, S, . . . is the commutativity
of their operators R, S, . . . . In fact, this holds for absolutely exact as well as for
arbitrarily exact measurements. In the ﬁrst case, however, it is also required
that the operators possess pure discrete spectra, as is characteristic of absolutely
exact measurements.
We have now produced the mathematical proof that P makes the most
extensive statement that is in general possible in this theory (i.e., in any
theory that includes P). This is due to the fact that it presumes only the
commutativity of the operators R1, . . . , Rℓ.
Without this condition, nothing
can be said concerning the results of simultaneous measurements of R1, . . . , Rℓ
since simultaneous measurements of these quantities are then in general not
possible.
4. UNCERTAINTY RELATIONS
In the foregoing sections we have obtained important information about
the measuring process involving a single quantity, or several simultaneously
measurable ones. We must now develop the procedure for quantities which are
not simultaneously measurable if we are interested in their statistics in the same
system (in the same state φ).
Therefore, let two such quantities R, S as well as their (non-commuting)
operators R, S be given.
In spite of this assumption, states φ may exist in
which both quantities have sharply deﬁned (i.e., dispersionless ) values—i.e.,
eigenfunctions common to both—but no complete orthonormal set can be
formed from these, since then R, S would commute. (See the construction given
in II.8 for the corresponding resolutions of the identity E(λ), F(λ). If φ1, φ2, . . .
is the complete orthonormal set mentioned then both E(λ) and F(λ) are P[φρ]
sums, and therefore commute since the P[φρ] do.) What this means can easily
be seen: the closed linear manifold M spanned by these φ must be smaller than
R∞because were this equal to R∞then the desired complete orthonormal set
could be built up exactly as was done in the beginning of II.6 for the case of a
single operator.
For the states of M our R, S are simultaneously measurable. This can be
shown most readily by indicating a model for this simultaneous measurement.
Since the common eigenfunctions of R, S span M there is also an orthonormal set
of such φ: φ1, φ2, . . . spanning M (i.e., complete in M). (This is also obtained by
the method of construction described previously in II.6.) We extend φ1, φ2, . . .


4. Uncertainty Relations
to a complete set φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . . by the addition of an orthonormal set
ψ1, ψ2, . . . which spans R∞−M.
Now let λ1, λ2, . . . , µ1, µ2, . . . be distinct
numbers and let T be deﬁned by
T
$ "
m
xmφm +
"
n
ynψn
%
=
"
m
λmxmφm +
"
n
µnynψn
where T is the corresponding quantity.
A measurement of T produces (as we know from III.3) one of the states
φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . . . If a ψm results (which can sensed by observing that the
result of the measurement is a λm) then we also know the values of R and S
because R, S have sharply deﬁned values in φm by our assumptions, and we
can predict with certainty that in an immediate measurement of R or S these
respective values will be found. On the other hand, if ψn is the result then we
know nothing of the sort (ψn does not lie in M; therefore R, S are not sharply
deﬁned in ψn). The probability of ﬁnding ψn is, as we know, (P[ψn]φ, φ), and
the probability of ﬁnding some ψn (n = 1, 2, . . .) is
"
n
(P[ψn]φ, φ) = (PR∞−Mφ, φ) = ∥PR∞−Mφ∥2 = ∥φ −PMφ∥2
If φ belongs to M—i.e., if φ = PMφ—then this probability is 0; i.e., R, S are
measured simultaneously with certainty.129
Since we are now interested in non-simultaneously measurable quantities
we shall now assume the existence of the extreme case M = O; i.e., we shall
assume that R, S are not simultaneously measurable in any state because no
eigenstates common to R, S exist.
If R, S have resolutions of the identity E(λ), F(λ) and the system is in state
φ then, as we know from III.1, the expectation values of R, S are
ρ = (Rφ, φ),
σ = (Sφ, φ)
and their dispersions—i.e., the expectation values of (R −ρ)2, (S −σ)2 (see
the discussion of absolutely precise measurements in III.3)—are
ϵ2 = ((R −ρ · I)φ, φ) = ∥(R −ρ · I)φ∥2 = ∥Rφ −ρφ∥2
η2 = ((S −σ · I)φ, φ) = ∥(S −σ · I)φ∥2 = ∥Sφ −σφ∥2
129 The further detailed discussion of the “simultaneous measurability for φ
of M” for R, S which are not measurable with absolute precision (continuous
spectra) is left to the reader. This can be carried out in the same way as in the
treatment of III.3.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
After a familiar transformation130 this becomes
ϵ2 = ∥Rφ∥2 −(Rφ, φ)2,
η2 = ∥Sφ∥2 −(Sφ, φ)2
From ∥φ∥= 1 and the Schwarz inequality (theorem 1, II.1) it follows that
both of these expressions are ⩾0.
There now arises the question: Since ϵ
and η cannot both be zero, but ϵ alone can be made arbitrarily small, and η
likewise (R, S are measurable separately with arbitrary exactness, and perhaps
even with absolute exactness), must there be relations between ϵ and η which
prevent their becoming arbitrarily small simultaneously, and what would be the
form of such relations?
The existence of such relations was discovered by Heisenberg.131 They are
of great importance for the knowledge of the uncertainties in the description
of nature produced by quantum mechanics. They are consequently known as
the uncertainty relations. We shall ﬁrst derive the most important relation of
this type mathematically, and then return to its fundamental meaning, and its
connection with experiment.
In matrix theory, operators P, Q with the commutation property
PQ −QP = ℏ
i I
play an important role: they were, for example, assigned to the coordinate
and its conjugate momentum (see I.2) or, more generally, to any two quantities
which were canonically conjugate in classical mechanics (see, for example, the
papers mentioned in Note 2). Let us examine any two such Hermitian operators
P, Q with
PQ −QP = a·I
(From (PQ −QP)∗= QP −PQ we have (a·I)∗= ¯a·I = −a·I giving ¯a = −a:
a is pure imaginary. This operator equation is not necessarily understood to
entail equality of the domains of deﬁnition of the two sides: PQ −QP need not
130 The operator calculation is the following:
ϵ2 = ((R −ρ · I)2φ, φ)
= (R2φ, φ) −2ρ · (Rφ, φ) + ρ2
= ∥Rφ∥2 −2 · (Rφ, φ)2 + (Rφ, φ)2
= ∥Rφ∥2 −(Rφ, φ)2
and similarly for η2.
131 Z. Physik 43 (1927).
These considerations were extended by Bohr,
Naturwiss.
16 (1928).
The mathematical discussion that follows was ﬁrst
undertaken by Kennard, Z. Physik 44 (1927), and was given by Robertson in
its present form.


4. Uncertainty Relations
make sense everywhere.) For each φ then
2Im(Pφ, Qφ) = −i[(Pφ, Qφ) −(Qφ, Pφ)]
= −i[(QPφ, φ) −(PQφ, φ)]
= (i[PQ −QP]φ, φ)
= ia ·∥φ∥2
Let a ̸= 0; then we have (by theorem 1, II.1)
∥φ∥2 = −2ia Im(Pφ, Qφ) ⩽
|a||(Pφ, Qφ)| ⩽
|a|∥Pφ∥·∥Qφ∥
and therefore, for ∥φ∥= 1,
∥Pφ∥·∥Qφ∥⩾1
2|a|
Since P −ρ·I, Q −σ·I satisfy that same commutation relation, we have by that
same argument
∥Pφ −ρ·φ∥·∥Qφ −σ ·φ∥⩾1
2|a|
and if we introduce the mean values and dispersions
ρ = (Pφ, φ),
ϵ2 = ∥Pφ −ρ·φ∥2
σ = (Qφ, φ),
η2 = ∥Qφ −ρ·φ∥2
then this becomes
U
ϵη ⩾1
2|a|
In order for the equality sign to hold it is necessary and suﬃcient that the ⩽
inequalities encountered in the derivation all be equalities. With P′ = P −ρ·I,
Q′ = Q −σ ·I we then have
−i |a|
a Im(P′φ, Q′φ) = |(P′φ, Q′φ)| = ∥P′φ∥·∥Q′φ∥
By theorem 1, II.1, the second equation means that P′φ and Q′φ diﬀer by
only a constant factor, and since ∥P′φ∥· ∥Q′φ∥⩾1
2|a| > 0 implies P′φ ̸= 0,
Q′φ ̸= 0 it must be the case that P′φ = c · Q′φ, c ̸= 0.
But the ﬁrst
equation means that (P′φ, Q′φ) = c∥Q′φ∥2 is pure imaginary, and in fact that its
i-coeﬃcient has the same sign as −i|a|/a (a real!); i.e., opposite to that of a.
Therefore c = iγ, γ real and <
> 0 for ia <
> 0, respectively. Consequently
Eq
P′φ = iγ · Q′φ
:
γ real, and <
> 0 for ia <
> 0
The deﬁnitions ofρ, σ entail (P′φ, φ) = 0, (Q′φ, φ) = 0. Since(P′φ, φ) = iγ(Q′φ, φ)
follows from Eq and is real on the left but imaginary on the right, the expressions
on both left and right must vanish, so the desired equations actually hold
automatically. We have yet to determine ϵ, η. We have the relations
ϵ : η = ∥P′φ∥: ∥Q′φ∥= |c| = |γ|,
ϵη = 1
2|a|


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
Therefore, since ϵ, η are both positive,
ϵ =
(
|a||γ|
,
η =
(
|a|
2|γ|
For the quantum mechanical case a = ℏ/i we get from U
U′
ϵη ⩾1
2ℏ
We discuss Eq in the case where P, Q are the operators of the Schr¨odinger
theory: P = ℏ
i
∂
∂q, Q = q·.(See I.2. We assume that a mechanical system with one
degree of freedom is under consideration, and that the single coordinate is q.)
Then Eq becomes
$ℏ
i
∂
∂q −ρ
%
φ = iγ(q −σ)φ
where because ia = ℏ> 0 we have γ > o. Therefore
∂
∂q φ = 1
ℏ
)
−γ q + γ σ + iρ
*
φ
which gives
φ = exp
+
ℏ
, q
{−γq + γσ + iρ}dq
-
= C · exp
. 1
ℏ
)
−1
2γq2 + γσq + iρq
*/
= C ′ · exp
.
−1
2(γ/ℏ)(q −σ)2/
· exp
.
i(ρ/ℏ)q
/
Since γ > 0, ∥φ∥2 =
0 +∞
−∞|φ(q)|2dq is indeed ﬁnite, and C ′ is obtained from
∥φ∥= 1:
∥φ∥2 =
, +∞
−∞
|φ(q)|2dq = |C ′|2
, +∞
−∞
exp
.
−(γ/ℏ)(q −σ)2/
dq
= |C ′|21
ℏ/γ ·
, +∞
−∞
e−x2dx
= |C ′|21
ℏ/γ · √π
= |C ′|21
h/2γ = 1
where
h = 2πℏ
∴
|C ′| =
$2γ
h
% 1
Therefore, by neglect of a physically unimportant factor of absolute value 1,
C ′ =
$2γ
h
% 1
and we have
φ = φ(q) =
$2γ
h
% 1
4 exp
+
−1
2(γ/ℏ)(q −σ)2 + i(ρ/ℏ)q
-


4. Uncertainty Relations
Then ϵ, η are given by
ϵ =
2ℏγ,
η =
2ℏ/γ
Aside from the condition ϵη = 1
2ℏthey are therefore arbitrary, since γ varies
from 0 to +∞. That is, each set of four quantities ρ, σ, ϵ, η satisfying ϵη = 1
2ℏ
is exactly realized by a φ.
These φ were ﬁrst investigated by Heisenberg,
and applied to the interpretation of quantum mechanical situations. They are
especially suitable for this because they represent the highest possible degree of
approximation (in quantum mechanics) to classical mechanical relations (where
p, q are both without dispersion!), where ϵ and η can be prescribed without
restrictions. (See the reference in Note 131.)
With the foregoing considerations we have addressed only one aspect of the
uncertainty relations; namely, the formal one. For a complete understanding
of these relations it is still necessary to consider them from another point of
view: from that of direct physical experience. For the uncertainty relations
bear a more easily understandable and simpler relation to direct experience
than many of the facts on which quantum mechanics was originally based, and
therefore the above—entirely formal—derivation does not do them full justice.
An intuitive discussion is all the more necessary since one could obtain, at
ﬁrst glance, an impression that a contradiction exists here with the ordinary,
intuitive point of view: it will not be clear to common sense without further
discussion why the position and velocity (i.e., coordinate and momentum) of
a material body cannot both be measured simultaneously and with arbitrarily
high accuracy, provided that suﬃciently reﬁned measurement instruments were
available.
Therefore it is necessary to elucidate by an exact analysis of the
ﬁnest measurement processes (capable of execution perhaps only in the sense of
ideal measurements) that this is not the case. Actually, the well-known laws of
wave optics, electrodynamics and elementary atomic processes place very great
diﬃculties in the way of accurate measurement precisely where this is required
by the uncertainty relations.
And in fact, this can already be recognized
if the processes in question are investigated purely classically (not quantum
theoretically).
This is an important point of principle.
It shows that the
uncertainty relations, although apparently paradoxical, do not conﬂict with
classical experience (i.e., with the area in which quantum phenomena do not
call for a correction of the earlier ways of thinking)—and classical experience
is the only kind which is valid independently of the correctness of quantum
mechanics; indeed, the only kind directly accessible to our ordinary, intuitive
way of thinking.132
132 The fundamental meaning of this circumstance was emphasized by Bohr.
See the reference in Note 131. Actually, the argument developed below is not
entirely classical at one point: the existence of light quanta will be assumed;
i.e., the fact that light of frequency ν never appears in quantities of energy
smaller than hν.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
We are then to show that if p, q are two canonically conjugate quantities,
and a system is in a state in which the value of p can be giving with accuracy ϵ
(i.e., by a p-measurement with an error range ϵ), then q can be known with no
greater accuracy than η = 1
2ℏ: ϵ. Which is to say: a measurement of p with
accuracy ϵ must bring about an indeterminacy η = 1
2ℏ: ϵ in the value of q.
Naturally, in these qualitative considerations we cannot expect to recover
each detail with perfect exactness.
Thus, instead of showing that ϵη =
2ℏ
we will be able to show only that ϵη ∼h for the most precise measurement
possible (i.e., that it is of the same order of magnitude as h). As a typical
example, we will consider the conjugate pair position (coordinate)-momentum
of a particle T.133
S
ss
L
β
T
s′s′
β2
β1
DETECTION SCREEN
Figure 1: Schematic arrangement for using columnated light L to
measure the position of a particle (Teilchens) T.
First let us investigate the determination of position. This results when one
looks at T; i.e., when T is illuminated and the scattered light is absorbed in
the eye.
Therefore, a light quantum L is emitted from a light source S in
the direction of T, and is deﬂected from its straight line path ββ1 into ββ2
by collision with T, and at the end of its path is annihilated by absorption at
the screen (which represents the eye or a photographic plate: figure 1). The
measurement takes place by the determination that L hits the screen not at 1
(the end of its undeﬂected path ββ1) but at 2 (the end of ββ2). But in order to
be able to furnish the position of the collision (i.e., of T) from this the directions
of β and β2 must also be known (i.e., L’s direction before and after the collision):
we achieve this by the interposition of slit systems ss and s′s′. (In this way
we are actually not performing a measurement of the coordinate of T but obtain
133 The following discussion is due to Heisenberg and Born. See references in
Note 131.


4. Uncertainty Relations
only an answer to the question of whether or not this coordinate has a certain
value, corresponding to the intersections of the directions β and β2. This value,
however, can be selected at will by appropriate arrangement of the slits. The
superposition of several such determinations—i.e., the use of additional slits s′s′
—is equivalent to the complete coordinate measurement.)
Now what is the
accuracy of this measurement of position?
This measurement has a fundamental limitation in the laws of optical image
formation.
Indeed, it is impossible, with light of wavelength λ, to picture
sharply objects which are smaller than λ, or even to reduce the scattering
to such an extent that one can speak of a (distorted) image. To be sure, we
did not require a faithful optical image, since the mere fact of the deviation
of L suﬃces to determine the position of T. Nevertheless, the slits ss and s′s′
cannot be narrower than λ, since otherwise L cannot pass through without
appreciable diﬀraction. Rather, a bundle of interference lines will then occur, so
that from knowledge of the slit locations nothing can be deduced concerning the
directions β and β2 of the light ray. As a consequence, it is never possible with
this projectile L to aim and hit with an accuracy greater than λ.
The wavelength λ is then a measure of the error in measuring the
coordinate: λ ∼ϵ. Further characteristics of L are: its frequency ν, its energy
E, its momentum p, and there exist the well-known relations
ν = c
λ,
E = hν = hc
λ ,
p = E
c = hc
c = h
λ
where c is the velocity of light.134
Consequently, p ∼h/ϵ.
Now there is a
momentum change in the (not exactly known) collision process between L and
T, which is clearly of the order of magnitude of p; i.e., of the same order as h/ϵ.
Hence there results an uncertainty η ∼h/ϵ in the momentum.
This would show that ϵη ∼h if one detail had not been overlooked. The
collision process is not really so unknown. We actually know the directions of
the motion of L before and after (β and β2), and therefore also its momentum,
and the momentum transferred to T can be obtained from this. Consequently,
p is not a measure of η; it is rather the directional uncertainty of the rays β
and β2 that will supply such a measure. Now in order to be able to establish
more precisely the relations between the “aiming” at the small object T and
the uncertainty of direction which is associated with it, it is appropriate to use
a better focusing device than the slit ss—namely, a lens. Consequently, the
well-known theory of the microscope must be considered.
This asserts the
following: in order to illuminate an element of surface with the linear extension
ϵ (i.e., to hit T with L with a precision ϵ), a wavelength λ and a lens aperture
ϕ are necessary, between which the relation
λ
2 sin 1
2ϕ ∼ϵ
134 See, for example, Einstein’s original paper (Ann. Physik 14 (1905)) or any
modern text.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
exists (figure 2).135 The uncertainty of the tt-component of the momentum
of L therefore rests upon the fact that its direction lies between −1
2ϕ and + 1
2ϕ,
but is otherwise unknown. Consequently, the error amounts to
2 sin 1
2ϕ · p = λ
ϵ · h
λ = h
ϵ
But this is the correct measure for η. Therefore we again have η ∼h/ϵ; i.e.,
ϵη ∼h.
S
t
t
L
ϕ
T
Figure 2: Reﬁnement of the coordinate-measurement set-up shown
in the preceding ﬁgure.
This example shows the mechanism of the uncertainty principle very
clearly: in order to aim more accurately, we need a large eye (large aperture ϕ)
and very short wavelength radiation; i.e., very uncertain (and large) momentum
for the light quantum, which produces collisions (Compton eﬀect) with the
observed object T that are out of control by a wide margin. In this way they
cause the dispersion in T’s momentum.
Let us also consider the complementary measurement process:
the
measurement of the velocity (momentum). It should ﬁrst be noted that the
135 For the theory of the microscope, see for example Handbuch der Physik,
Berlin, 1927, Volume 18, Chapter 2·G. In very precise measurements, ϵ—and
therefore λ—is very small; i.e., γ-rays or light of still shorter wavelength are to
be used. A normal lens fails under such circumstances. The only type which
could be used would be one whose molecules are neither shattered by these
γ-rays nor knocked out of position by them.
Since the existence of such
molecules, or particles, encroaches on no known natural law, their use is possible
for the purposes of an idealized experiment.


4. Uncertainty Relations
natural procedure for the measurement of the velocity of T is to measure its
position at two times, say 0 and t, and divide the change in coordinates by t.
In this case, however, the velocity in the time interval [0, t] must be constant;
if it changes, then this change is a measure of the deviation between the mean
velocity (thus calculated) and the actual velocity (say instantaneously at t);
i.e., a measure of the uncertainty in the measurement.
The same holds for
the measurement of the momentum.
Now if the coordinate measurements
are obtained with precision ϵ this does not actually aﬀect the precision of
the measurement of the mean momentum, since t can be chosen arbitrarily
large. Nevertheless, it does produce momentum changes of the order of h/ϵ, and
therefore an uncertainty relative to the ﬁnal momentum (in its relationship to
the mean momentum mentioned above) of η ∼h/ϵ. A diﬀerent (more favorable)
result
can
therefore
only
obtain—if
at
all—from
momentum
measurements which are not connected with position measurement.
Such
measurements are entirely possible, and are frequently used in astronomy. They
rely on the Doppler eﬀect, and we shall now consider this eﬀect.
The Doppler eﬀect is the following, as is well known. Light which is emitted
from a body T moving with velocity v, and which is emitted with frequency ν0
(measured on the moving body), is actually measured by the observer at rest
as having a diﬀerent frequency ν, which can be calculated from the relation
(ν −ν0)/ν0 = (v/c) cos ϕ. (ϕ is the angle between the direction of motion and
the direction of emission. This formula is non-relativistic; i.e., it is valid only for
small values of v/c, but this limitation could easily be corrected.) Determination
of the velocity is therefore possible if ν is observed and ν0 is known—perhaps
because it refers to a particular spectral line of a known element. More exactly,
the component of velocity in the direction of the observation (light emission
direction)
v cos ϕ = c(ν −ν0)
ν
is measured, or equivalently: the corresponding component of momentum
p′ = p cos ϕ = mc(ν −ν0)
ν0
where m is the mass of the body T. The dispersion of p′ evidently depends on
the dispersion ∆ν of ν. Therefore
η ∼mc ∆ν
ν0
∼mc ∆ν
ν
The momentum of T is of course changed when T emits a light quantum of
frequency ν (and therefore of momentum p = hν/c), but the uncertainty h∆ν/c
of this quantity can ordinarily be neglected in comparison with mc ∆ν
ν .136
136 mc ∆ν
ν
large in comparison to h ∆νc
means that ν is small in comparison
to mc2/h; i.e., E = hν is small compared to mc2. That is, the energy of the
light quantum L is small in comparison to the relativistic rest energy of T—an
assumption which is unavoidable for non-relativistic calculation.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
Frequency ν is measured by any interference method, but this type of
measurement will give an absolutely sharp ν-value only with a purely
monochromatic wave train. Such a wave train has the form
a sin[2π(λ
–1q −ν t) + α]
(here q is the coordinate, t the time, a the amplitude, α the phase:
this
expression may refer to any component of the electric or magnetic ﬁeld strength)
which extends inﬁnitely in both space and time. To avoid this we must replace
the preceding expression—which can also be written
a sin[2πν(q/c −t) + α]
since λ = c/ν —by another, F(q/c −t), which is non-zero only in a ﬁnite
argument interval. If the light ﬁeld has this form, then Fourier analysis supplies
F(x) =
, +∞
aν sin(2πνx + αν)dν
and the interference picture shows all frequencies ν for which aν ̸= 0. In fact,
the frequency interval [ν, ν+dν ] has the relative intensity a 2
ν dν. The dispersion
of ν—i.e., ∆ν—is to be calculated from this distribution.
If our wave train has the length τ in x, i.e., in t and q the respective
lengths are τ and cτ, then it can be seen that the ν-dispersion is ∼τ –1.137 An
indeterminacy of the position now results from this method of measurement
because T undergoes recoil hν/c (in the direction of observation) from individual
light emission; i.e., a velocity change hν/mc results. Since the emission process
takes time τ, we cannot localize the time of this change in velocity more
accurately than τ. Hence an indeterminacy of position ϵ ∼(hν/mc)τ results.
Therefore
ϵ ∼hν
mc τ,
η ∼mc ∆ν
ν = mc
ν
1τ ,
ϵη ∼h
So we again have ϵη ∼h.
If T is not self-luminous, as we assumed here, but scatters other light (i.e.,
if it is illuminated) the calculation proceeds in a similar fashion.
137 Let, for example, F(x) be a ﬁnite monochromatic wave train of frequency
ν0 extending from 0 to τ:
F(x) =
3 α sin 2πν0x
for
0 ⩽x ⩽τ
otherwise
(To achieve continuity at the junction, sin 2πν0τ must vanish there; i.e.,
ν0 = n
2τ : n = 1, 2, 3, . . .) Then, on the basis of the known inversion formulae of


5. Projections as Propositions
5. PROJECTIONS AS PROPOSITIONS
As in III.1, let us consider a physical system S with k degrees of freedom,
the conﬁguration space of which is described by k coordinates q1, . . . , qk (see
also I.2). All physical quantities R which can be formed in the system S are,
in the manner of classical mechanics, functions of q1, . . . , qk and the conjugate
momenta p1, . . . , pk: R = R(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk) (for example, the energy is
the Hamiltonian function H(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk)). In quantum mechanics on
the other hand, as we already pointed out in III.1, the quantities R correspond
one-to-one to hypermaximal Hermitian operators R. In particular, q1, . . . , qk
the Fourier integral (see the reference in Note 87), a 2
ν = b 2
ν + c 2
ν with
bν
cν
= 2
, +∞
−∞
F(x)cos
sin 2πνx dx = 2a
, τ
sin 2πν0x · cos
sin 2πνx dx
= ±a
, τ
&sin
cos π(ν + ν0)x −sin
cos π(ν −ν0)x
'
dx
= −a
5cos
sin π(ν + ν0)x
π(ν + ν0)
−
cos
sin π(ν −ν0)x
π(ν −ν0)
6τ
=









−a
+(−1)n cos πντ −1
π(ν + ν0)
−(−1)n cos πντ −1
π(ν −ν0)
-
−a
+(−1)n sin πντ
π(ν + ν0)
−(−)n sin πντ
π(ν −ν0)
-
=









−2aν0[1 −(−1)n cos πντ]
π(ν2 −ν2
0)
2aν0(−1)n sin πντ
π(ν2 −ν2
0)
Therefore
aν = 2aν0
2 −2(−1)n cos πντ
π(ν2 −ν2
0)
= 4aν0
;;sin
cos
2πντ
;;
π(ν2 −ν2
0)
= 4aν0| sin(ν −ν0)τ|
π(ν2 −ν2
0)
As we see, the frequencies in the neighborhood of ν = ν0 are most strongly
represented, and the greatest part of the energy in the wave train falls in that
frequency interval in which π(ν −ν0)τ has moderate values.
Therefore the
dispersion of ν −ν0 (or, which is the same thing, that of ν) has the order of
magnitude τ –1. Exact calculation of the expression
0 ∞
a 2
ν (ν −ν0)2dν
0 ∞
a 2
ν dν
gives the same result.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
correspond to the operators Q1 = q1·, . . . , Qk = qk· and p1, . . . , pk to the
operators P1 = (ℏ/i) ∂
∂q1 , . . . , Pk = (ℏ/i) ∂
∂qk . It has already been noted in the
case of the Hamiltonian function (I.2) that is not possible in general to deﬁne
R = R(Q1, . . . , Qk, P1, . . . , Pk)
because of the non-commutativity of the Qℓ, Pℓ. Nevertheless, without being
able to give any ﬁnal and complete rules regarding the relationship between the
functions R(q1, . . . , qk, p1, . . . , pk) and the operators R, we stated the following
special rules in III.1 and III.2:
L. If the operators R, S correspond to the simultaneously observable
quantities R, S then the operator aR + bS (a and b real numbers)
corresponds to the quantity aR + bS.
F. If the operator R corresponds to the quantity R then the operator
F(R) corresponds to the quantity F(R), where F(λ) is an arbitrary
real function.
L, F permit a certain generalization, which runs as follows:
F∗. If the operators R, S, . . . correspond to the simultaneously
observable quantities R,S, . . . (which are consequentlycommutative;
we assume that their number is ﬁnite) then the operator F(R, S, . . .)
corresponds to the quantity F(R, S, . . .).
By way of proof, we shall assume that F(λ, µ, . . .) is a real polynomial in
λ, µ, . . . so that the meaning of F(R, S, . . .) may be clear (R, S, . . . commutative),
although F∗could be established for arbitrary F(λ, µ, . . .) (for the deﬁnition
of the general F(R, S, . . .) see the reference in Note 94).
Now since every
polynomial is obtained by repetition of the three operations aλ, λ + µ, λµ it
suﬃces to consider these, and since λµ = 1
4[(λ + µ)2 −(λ −µ)2]—i.e., is equal
to
4 · (λ + µ)2 + (−1
4) · (λ + (−1) · µ)2
—we can replace these three operations by aλ, (λ+µ), λ2. But the ﬁrst two fall
under L and the latter under F. So F∗is proved.
On the other hand, L is extended in quantum mechanics even to the case
where R, S are not simultaneously measurable. We shall discuss this issue later
(in IV.1), but at present limit ourselves to the observation that even the meaning
of aR + bS for R, S not simultaneously measurable is not yet clear.
Apart from the physical quantities R there exists another category of
concepts that are important objects of physics—namely, the properties of the
states of the system S. Some such properties are: that a certain quantity R
takes a value λ. Or that the value of R is positive. Or that the values of two
simultaneously observable quantities R, S are λ and µ respectively. Or that
the sum of the squares of these values is > 1, etc. We have denoted quantities


5. Projections as Propositions
by R, S, . . . and will denote their properties by E, F, . . . . The hypermaximal
operators R, S, . . . correspond to the quantities. What now corresponds to the
properties?
To each property E we can assign a quantity which we deﬁne as follows:
each measurement which distinguishes between the presence or absence of E is
considered to comprise a measurement of this property, such that its value is 1
if E is veriﬁed, and 0 in the opposite case. This quantity which corresponds to
E will also be denoted E.
Such quantities take on only the values 0 and 1, and conversely: each
quantityR which iscapable of only these two values corresponds to a property E,
which is evidently this:
“the value of R is ̸= 0.”
The quantities E that
correspond to properties are therefore characterized by this behavior.
That E takes on only the values 0 and 1 can also be formulated as follows:
Substituting E into the polynomial F(λ) = λ −λ2 makes it vanish identically.
If E has the operator E then F(E) has the operator F(E) = E −E2; i.e., the
condition is that E −E2 = O or E2 = E. In other words: the operator E of E is
a projection.
The projections E therefore correspond to the properties E (through the
agency of the corresponding quantities E which we just deﬁned). If we introduce,
along with the projections E, the closed linear manifolds M belonging to them
(E = PM) then the closed linear manifolds M correspond equally to the
properties E.
Relations among corresponding E, E and M will be examined now in detail.
If, in a state φ, we want to determine whether or not a property E is
veriﬁed, then we must measure the quantity E and ascertain whether its value
is 1 or 0 (these processes are identical by deﬁnition). The probability of the
former, i.e., that E is veriﬁed, is consequently equal to the expectation value
of E
(Eφ, φ) = ∥Eφ∥2 = ∥PMφ∥2
and that of the latter; i.e., that E is not veriﬁed, is equal to the expectation
value of 1 −E
((I −E)φ, φ) = ∥(I −E)φ∥2 = ∥φ −PMφ∥2
(The sum, of course, is equal to (φ, φ); i.e., to 1.) Consequently, E is certainly
present or certainly absent according as the second or ﬁrst probability is equal
to zero; i.e., according as PMφ = φ or PMφ = 0. That is, according as φ belongs
to M or is orthogonal to M; i.e., according as φ belongs to M or to R∞−M.
M can therefore be deﬁned as the set of all φ which possess the property E
with certainty. (Such φ are found actually only in the subset of M that lies on
the surface ∥φ∥= 1. M itself is obtained by multiplying these φ with positive
constants and the adjunction of 0.)


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
If we call the property opposite that of E (the denial of E) “not E,” then
it follows immediately from the above that if E, M belong to E, then I −E and
R∞−M belong to “not E.”
As
with
quantities,
there
arises
here
also
the
question
of
the
simultaneous measurability (or rather,
the simultaneous decidability) of
properties.
It is clear that properties E, F are simultaneously decidable if
and only if the corresponding quantities E, F are simultaneously measurable
(whether with arbitrarily great or with absolute accuracy is unimportant, since
they admit only of the values 0, 1); i.e., if E, F commute. The same holds for
several properties E, F, G, . . . .
From properties E, F which are simultaneously decidable we can form the
additional properties “E and F” and “E or F.” The quantity corresponding
to “E and F” is 1 if those corresponding to E and to F are both 1, and it is
0 if one (or both) of these is 0. Hence, it is the product of these quantities.
By F∗its operator is the product of the operators of E and F; i.e., EF. By
theorem 14, II.4 the corresponding closed linear manifold P is the set common
to M, N.
On the other hand,“E or F” can be written
“not [(not E) and (not F)]”
and therefore its operator is
I −(I −E)(I −F) = E + F −EF
(which, because of its origin, is also a projection). Since F −EF is a projection,
the linear manifold belonging to E+F−EF is M+(N−P) (theorem 14, II.4).
It is a subset of {M, N} and evidently embraces M, whence (by symmetry) also
N, and therefore all of {M, N}. Consequently, it is equal to {M, N} and this,
since it is closed, is equal to [M, N].
If E is a property which is always present (i.e., empty) then the
corresponding quantity is identically 1; i.e., E = I, M = R∞. If, on the other
hand, E is never present (i.e., impossible) then the corresponding quantity is
identically 0; i.e., E = O, M = O. If two properties E, F are incompatible
then they must at any rate be simultaneously decidable, and “E in addition
to F” must be impossible; i.e., E, F commute: EF = O. But since EF = O
implies commutativity (theorem 14, II.4), this by itself is characteristic. If
E, F are presumed to be commutative then EF = O means merely that the
subset common to M and N consists only of O. However, the commutativity
of E,F does not follow from this alone. Indeed, EF = O is equivalent to all M
being orthogonal to all N.
If R is a quantity with operator R to which belongs the resolution of the
identityE(λ),then the operator of the property“R lies in the intervalI = {λ′, µ′}”
(λ′ ⩽µ′) is E(µ′) −E(λ′). To say this it suﬃces to observe that the probability


5. Projections as Propositions
of the above proposition is
!
(E(µ′)−E(λ′))φ, φ
"
(see P in II.1). Phrased another
way: the quantity belonging to the property in question is E = F(R), where
F(λ) =
# 1
for
λ′ < λ ⩽µ′
otherwise
and F(R) = E(µ′) −E(λ′) (see II.8 or III.1). We called this operator E(I) in III.1.
Summarizing, we have thus obtained the following information about the
relations among properties E, their projections E and the closed linear
manifolds of these projections:
α) In the state φ the property E is or is not present with the
probabilities
(Eφ, φ) = ∥Eφ∥2 = ∥PMφ∥2
and
((I −E)φ, φ) = ∥(I −E)φ∥2 = ∥φ −PMφ∥2
respectively.
β) E is certainly present or certainly absent for the φ of M and
R∞−M respectively, and only for these.
γ) For the simultaneous decidability of several properties E, F, . . .
the commutativity of their operators E, F, . . . is characteristic.
δ) If E, M belong to E then I −E, R∞−M belong to “not E.”
ϵ) If E, M belong to E and F, N belong to F and if E, F can be decided
simultaneously, then EF and the common part of M, N belong to
“E and F,” while E+F−EF, {M, N} (this is equal to [M, N]) belong
to “E or F.”
η) E always holds if E = I (which is to say: if M = R∞); it never
holds if E = O (which is to say: if M = O).
θ) E, F are incompatible if EF = O (which is to say: if all M is
orthogonal to all N).
ζ) Let R be a quantity, R is operator, and I an interval. Let E(λ) be
the resolution of the identity belonging to R, I = {λ′, µ′}, (λ′ ⩽µ′),
E(I) = E(µ′) −E(λ′) (see III.1). Then the operator E(I) belongs to
the property “R lies in I.”
From α – ζ we can derive the earlier probability statements P, E1, E2, as
well as the statements of III.3 on simultaneous measurability. It is clear that the
latter are equivalent to γ; P follows from α,ϵ,ζ and has E1, E1 as consequences.
As can be seen, the relation between the properties of a physical system
on the one hand, and the projections on the other, makes possible a sort of
logical calculus involving those concepts. However, in contrast to the concepts


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
of ordinary logic, this system is extended by the concept of “simultaneous
decidability” which is characteristic for quantum mechanics.
Moreover, the calculus of these propositions, based on projections, has
the advantage over the calculus of quantities, which is based on the totality
of (hypermaximal) Hermitian operators, in that the concept of “simultaneous
decidability”
represents
a
reﬁnement
of
the
concept
of
“simultaneous
measurability.” For example: In order for the questions “does R lie in I?”
and “does S lie in J?” (here R, S have operators R, S of which the respective
resolutions of the identity are E(λ), F(µ) and I = {λ′, λ′′}, J = {µ′, µ′′}) to be
simultaneously decidable we require (by γ, ζ) only that the operators
E(I) = E(λ′′) −E(λ′)
and
F(J) = F(µ′′) −F(µ′)
commute. For simultaneous measurability of R, S, however, the commutativity
of all E(λ) with all F(µ) is necessary.
6. RADIATION THEORY
We have obtained once again the statistical statements of quantum
mechanics developed in
I.2,
substantially generalized and systematically
arranged—with one exception. We are lacking the Heisenberg expression for
the transition probability from one stationary state of a quantized system to
another—although this played an important role in the development of quantum
mechanics (see the comments in I.2). Following the method of Dirac,138 we shall
now show how these transition probabilities can be derived from the ordinary
statistical statements of quantum mechanics; i.e., from the theory just now
developed.
This is all the more important since such a derivation will give
us deeper insight into the mechanism of transitions of the stationary states,
and into the Einstein-Bohr energy-frequency conditions. The radiation theory
advanced by Dirac is one of the most beautiful achievements in the quantum
mechanical ﬁeld.
Let S be a system (say, a quantized atom) with an energy which
corresponds to the Hermitian operator H0. We represent the coordinates which
describe the conﬁguration space of S by a single symbol ξ (if, for example, S
consists of ℓparticles then there are 3ℓcartesian coordinates:
x1 = q1, y1 = q2, z1 = q3, . . . , xℓ= q3ℓ−2, yℓ= q3ℓ−1, zℓ= q3ℓ
—ξ stands for all of these together). Furthermore, we assume for simplicity that
H0 has a pure discrete spectrum: eigenvalues w1, w2, . . . and eigenfunctions
φ1(ξ), φ2(ξ), . . . (several wm may coincide).
An arbitrary state of S—i.e., a
wave function φ(ξ)—is developed according to the time-dependent Schr¨odinger
138 Proc.Roy.Soc.114(1927). See also the presentation in Weyl,Gruppentheorie
und Quantenmechanik, 2nd edition, p. 91 ﬀ. Leipzig (1931).


6. Radiation Theory
equation (see III.2):
ℏ
i
∂
∂tφt(ξ) = −H0 φt(ξ)
So if at t = t0
φt(ξ) = φ(ξ) =
∞
$
k=1
akφk(ξ)
then at general times
φt(ξ) =
∞
$
k=1
ake−i
ℏwk(t−t0)φk(ξ)
The eigenstate φk(ξ) therefore evolves into e−i
ℏwk(t−t0)φk(ξ); i.e., into itself
(since the factor e−i
ℏwk(t−t0) is irrelevant).
Hence the φk(ξ) are stationary.
Thus we ﬁnd in general no transitions from one into another. How is it that
we do nevertheless speak of such transitions? The answer is simple. We have
disregarded the agent that causes these transitions—radiation. The stationary
quantum orbits break down, on the basis of the original Bohr theory, only
under the emission of radiation (see the reference in Note 5), but if this is
neglected (as in the set-up just given) then it is quite possible that absolute
and permanent stability results. We must therefore extend the system to be
investigated, so that we include the radiation which may be emitted by S;
i.e., we must include, in general, all the radiation which can interact with S
under any circumstances. If we denote by L the system which is formed by the
radiation (i.e., the electromagnetic ﬁeld of classical theory, less the stationary
ﬁeld resulting from the electronic and nuclear charges), then it is S + L that we
must investigate.
To that end, we must ﬁrst accomplish the following:
1. Construct a quantum mechanical description of L; to accomplish
that we must possess a description of the conﬁguration space of L.
2. Construct the energy operator of S + L. This problem resolves
into three parts:
α) Look to the energy of S, which is present independently
of L; i.e., to the unperturbed energy of S. This is described
by the operator H0
β) Look to the energy of L, which is present independently
of S; i.e., to the unperturbed energy of L. This is described
by an operator that we will call H1
γ) Look to the energy associated with the interaction of S
and L. This is described by an operator that we will call Hi
Clearly we have questions here which, in accord with the fundamental principles
of quantum mechanics, must ﬁrst be answered classically. The results so obtained
can then be translated into operator form (see I.2). We therefore adopt (at


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
ﬁrst) a purely classical point of view relative to the nature of the radiation:
we consider it (in the sense of the electromagnetic theory of radiation) as an
oscillatory state of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.139
In order to avoid unnecessary complications (the loss of radiation in inﬁnite
space, etc.) we consider S and L to be enclosed within a very large cavity H
of volume V which shall have perfectly reﬂecting walls. As is well known, the
state of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in H is described by electric and magnetic ﬁeld
strengths E = {Ex, Ey, Ez} and H = {Hx, Hy, Hz}. All quantities {Ex, . . . , Hz}
are functions of the cartesian coordinates x, y, z in H and of the time t. It
should also be pointed out that we shall now frequently consider real space
vectors a = {ax, ay, az}, b = {bx, by, bz}, etc. (for example E, H ). And for
these, concepts such as the inner or scalar product
[a,b] = axbx + ayby + azbz
which will not be confused with the inner product (φ, ψ) in R∞. We denote the
diﬀerential operator
∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2
by △, and will denote some well-known vector operations by div, curl, grad.
The vectors E,H satisfy the Maxwell equations in the empty space H:
divH = 0,
curlE + 1
c
∂
∂tH = 0
divE = 0,
curlH −1
c
∂
∂tE = 0
The ﬁrst equation of the ﬁrst row is satisﬁed by H = curlA, where
A ={Ax, Ay, Az} is the so-called vector potential; its components also depend
on x, y, z, t. The second equation in that row then follows from E = −1
c
∂
∂tA
and the equations of the second row become
A
divA = 0,
△A −1
c2 ∂2
∂t2A = 0
(The vector potential is usually introduced in a somewhat diﬀerent way in
order to improve the symmetry in space and time. That the present set-up
for A furnishes a general solution for Maxwell’s equations—where it is to be
noted that the ﬁrst equation in the second row actually gives only ∂
∂tdivA = 0;
i.e., divA = f(x, y, z)—is shown in most treatments of the Maxwell theory,
so will not be developed to any extent here: see the reference in Note 139.)
A provides our starting point for the following discussion. The fact that (by
assumption) the walls of H are reﬂecting is expressed by the condition that A
must be perpendicular to the walls at the boundaries of H. The well-known
139 The interested reader will ﬁnd treatments of the electromagnetic theory
of radiation in any electromagnetic textbook; see, for example, Abraham and
Becker, Theorie der Electrizit¨at, Berlin, 1930. See these also for the following
developments, which belong to the framework of the Maxwell theory.


6. Radiation Theory
method for ﬁnding all such A’s is this: Since t nowhere enters explicitly into
the problem, the most general A is a linear combination of all those solutions
which are products of an {x, y, z}-dependent vector with a t-dependent scalar:
A = A(x, t, z, t) = A(x, y, z) · ˜q(t)
Therefore A gives
A1
divA = 0,
△A = ηA,
A ⊥boundary at boundary of H
A2
∂2
∂t2 ˜q(t) = c2η · ˜q(t)
Because of A1, η is t-independent. But because of A2 it is {x, y, z}-independent.
Therefore η is constant.
A1 therefore poses an eigenvalue problem, in which η is the eigenvalue
parameter and A the general eigenfunction.
The theory of this problem is
fully known and we shall give only the results here:140 A1 has a pure discrete
spectrum, and all eigenvalues η1, η2, . . . (let the corresponding A be A1,A2, . . .)
are negative, and ηn →−∞as n →∞. We can normalize the complete set
A1,A2, . . . by
%%%
H
[Am,An]dxdydz =
&
4πc2
for
m = n
for
m ̸= n
(We choose 4πc2 instead of the customary 1 because it will prove to be somewhat
more practical later.) If we adopt the notation
ηn = −4π2ρ2
n
c2
< 0
then A2 gives
˜qn(t) = γ cos 2πρn(t −τ)
:
(γ, τ arbitrary)
Therefore the general solution A can be developed
A = A(x, y, z, t) =
∞
$
n=1
An(x, y, z) · ˜qn(t)
=
∞
$
n=1
An(x, y, z) · γn cos 2πρn(t −τn)
where γ1, γ2, . . . , τ1, τ2, . . . are arbitrary constants. The energy of the arbitrary
ﬁeld
A =
∞
$
n=1
An(x, y, z) · ˜qn(t)
140 See R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methoden der mathematischen Physik I,
pages 358–362, Berlin 1924.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
(A is now not assumed to be a solution of A; i.e., the ˜qn(t) are arbitrary) can
be written
E =
8π
%%%
H
!
[E,E ] + [H,H ]
"
dxdydz
=
8π
%%%
H
'
c2 [ ∂
∂tA, ∂
∂tA] + [curlA, curlA]
(
dxdydz
=
8π
∞
$
m,n=1
%%%
H
'
c2 ∂
∂t ˜qm(t) ∂
∂t ˜qn(t)[Am,An]
+ ˜qm(t)˜qn(t)[curlAm, curlAn]
(
dxdydz
Upon integrating by parts,141 we ﬁnd
%%%
H
[curlAm, curlAn]dxdydz =
%%%
H
[curl curlAm,An]dxdydz
=
%%%
H
[−△Am + grad divAm,An]dxdydz
= 4π2ρ2
m
c2
%%%
H
[Am,An]dxdydz
Therefore
E =
8π
∞
$
m,n=1
)
c2 ∂
∂t ˜qm(t) ∂
∂t ˜qn(t) + 4π2ρ2
m
c2
˜qm(t)˜qn(t)
*
·
%%%
H
[Am,An]dxdydz
= 1
∞
$
m=1
+'
∂
∂t ˜qm(t)
(2
+ 4π2ρ2
m
'
˜qm(t)
(2,
But we can regard the ˜q1, ˜q2 . . . as coordinates describing the instantaneous
state of the ﬁeld; i.e., as the coordinates of the conﬁguration space of L. The
conjugate momenta ˜pm (in the sense of classical mechanics!) are obtained from
141 We have
%%%
H
[a, curl b]dxdydz =
%%%
H
[curl a,b]dxdydz
because of
[a, curl b] −[curl a,b] = grad(a × b)
(here a × b is the so-called outer or vector product of a,b) if the normal
components of a × b vanish on the boundary of H. Since a × b is
perpendicular to a and to b, this is certainly the case if a or b is perpendicular
to the boundary of H. We have a = curlAm, b = An so that the former indeed
occurs.


6. Radiation Theory
the formula
E = 1
∞
$
m=1
-! ∂
∂t ˜qm
"2 + 4π2ρ2
m˜q 2
m
.
This gives (see I.2)
˜pn =
∂E
∂( ∂
∂t ˜qn) = ∂
∂t ˜qn
whence
E = 1
∞
$
n=1
-
˜p 2
n + 4π2ρ2
m˜q 2
n
.
and supplies classical mechanical equations of motion
∂
∂t ˜qn = + ∂E
∂˜pn
= ˜pn
∂
∂t ˜pn = −∂E
∂˜qn
= −4π2ρ2
n˜qn
which conjointly give back precisely the equations A2 that follow from Maxwell’s
equations. Consequently Jeans’ theorem holds:
The radiation ﬁeld L can be described classically by coordinates
˜q1, ˜q2, . . . —which are connected through
A = A(x, y, z) =
∞
$
n=1
˜qnA(x, y, z)
with the instantaneous vector potential A describing the ﬁeld—with
the aid of energy (Hamiltonian function)
E = 1
∞
$
n=1
-
˜p 2
n + 4π2ρ2
m˜q 2
n
.
A point particle of unit mass constrained to move on a straight line
(coordinate ˜q) in the presence of the potential ﬁeld C ˜q 2, C = 2π2ρ2 has energy
2[(∂˜q/∂t)2 + 4π2ρ2˜q 2] which, since again ˜p = ∂˜q/∂t, can also be written
2[˜p2 + 4π2ρ2˜q 2]. The equation of motion of such a particle therefore reads
∂2
∂t2 ˜q + 4π2ρ2˜q = 0
of which the solution is ˜q(t) = γ cos 2πρ(t −τ), (γ, τ arbitrary). Because of the
form of its motion, such a mechanical system is called “a linear oscillator of
frequency ρ.” L may therefore be regarded as a set of linear oscillators whose
frequencies are the eigenfrequencies dictated by the geometry of H: ρ1, ρ2, . . . .
This “mechanical” description of the electromagnetic ﬁeld is important
because it can immediately be reinterpreted in the sense standard to the methods
of quantum mechanics. The conﬁguration space of L is described by ˜q1, ˜q2, . . .
and in the expression for E the ˜pn, ˜qn will be replaced by
ℏ
i
∂
∂˜qn and ˜qn·


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
respectively. We will call these operators ˜Pn and ˜Qn. Then the questions 1
and 2β (see again page 161) are answered, and in particular
H1 = 1
∞
$
n−1
!˜Pn
2 + 4π2ρ2
n ˜Qn
2"
is the operator sought in response to 2β. 2α was solved previously, since we
assumed H0 to be known. There remains only 2γ, but this will be found now
to cause no additional diﬃculties.
By classical electrodynamics, the interaction of S with L is to be calculated
in the following way: Let S consist of ℓparticles (perhaps protons or electrons)
with respective charges and masses e1, M1, . . . , eℓ, Mℓand cartesian coordinates
x1 = q1, y1 = q2, z1 = q3, . . . , xℓ= q3ℓ−2, yℓ= q3ℓ−1, zℓ= q3ℓ(these were
previously denoted ξ) and let px
1, p1y, pz
1, . . . , px
ℓ, pℓy, pz
ℓdenote the corresponding
momenta. The interaction energy is then (in suﬃcient approximation)142
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
cMν
-
px
νAx(xν, yν, zν) + py
νAy(xν, yν, zν) + pz
νAz(xν, yν, zν)
.
The corresponding quantum operator is obtained when px
ν, py
ν, pz
ν, xν, yν, zν are
replaced by operators
ℏ
i
∂
∂xν , ℏ
i
∂
∂yν , ℏ
i
∂
∂zν , xν, yν, zν
:
ν = 1, 2, . . . , ℓ
which we will denote Px
ν, Py
ν, Pz
ν, Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν. We have now only to draw upon
A(x, y, z) =
∞
$
n=1
˜qnAn(x, y, z)
to obtain the desired Hi:
Hi =
∞
$
n=1
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
cMν
˜Qn
+
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
+ Py
ν An,y(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + Px
ν An,z(Qz
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
,
It should be observed that when we proceeded from (say) px
νAn,x(x, y, z) to
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) we arbitrarily placed the operators in a certain order but
might just as well have placed them in reversed order, or perhaps (to achieve
Hermiticity) in symmetrized combination:
2[Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)Px
ν ]
142 See, for example, the reference in Note 138.


6. Radiation Theory
Fortunately, such distinctions make no diﬀerence in the present context
because143
-
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + · · ·
.
−
-
An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)Px
ν + · · ·
.
=
-
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) −An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)Px
ν
.
+ · · ·
= ℏ
i
∂
∂xAn,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + · · ·
= ℏ
i divAn(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) = 0
Thus the total energy of our system S + L—i.e., its operator
H = H0 + H1 + Hi
—is now completely speciﬁed. But before we proceed further, let us note the
following: S + L’s conﬁguration space is described by the coordinates ξ (i.e.,
q1, . . . , q3ℓwhich are just other names for x1, y1, z1, . . . , xℓ, yℓ, zℓ) and ˜q1, ˜q2, . . . .
Therefore the wave function depends on these. But it is inconvenient formally
and of doubtful validity to admit systems with inﬁnitely many degrees of
freedom, or wave functions with inﬁnitely many arguments. Our work heretofore
always assumed the number of coordinates to be ﬁnite. We shall therefore begin
by considering only the ﬁrst N of the ˜q1, ˜q2, . . . (namely ˜q1, . . . , ˜qN, and shall
limit A to linear combinations of A1, . . . ,AN), and only after we have obtained
a ﬁnal result based on these will we carry out the necessary transition to
the limit N →∞.
So we have
H = H0 + 1
N
$
n=1
!˜Pn
2 + 4π2ρ2
n ˜Qn
2"
+
N
$
n=1
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
cMν
˜Qn
+
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
+ Py
ν An,y(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + Px
ν An,z(Qz
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
,
It is convenient to introduce the (non-Hermitian) operators
˜Rn =
√2hρn (2πρn ˜Qn + i˜Pn)
˜R
∗
n =
√2hρn (2πρn ˜Qn −i˜Pn)
143 Since Px
ν commutes with Qy
ν, Qz
ν—though not with Qx
ν—we have to establish
the following relation in order to carry out the following manipulations (we
neglect superﬂuous indices, and replace A by F):
PF(Q) −F(Q)P = ℏ
i F ′(Q)
if
P = ℏ
i
∂
∂q, Q = q·
This relation, which is of especial importance in matrix theory, can be veriﬁed
most easily by direct calculation.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
in place of ˜Qn and ˜Pn. Then
˜Qn =
2π
/
h/2ρn
! ˜Rn + ˜R
∗
n
"
and because ˜Pn ˜Qn −˜Qn˜Pn = ℏ
i I
˜Rn˜R
∗
n =
2hρn
!˜Pn
2 + 4π2ρ2
n ˜Qn
2"
+ 1
2 · I
˜R
∗
n˜Rn =
2hρn
!˜Pn
2 + 4π2ρ2
n ˜Qn
2"
−1
2 · I
Therefore, in particular, ˜Rn˜R
∗
n −˜R
∗
n˜Rn = I and the energy operator becomes
H = H0+
N
$
n=1
hρn · ˜R
∗
n˜Rn + C
+
N
$
n=1
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
2πcMν
/
h/2ρν
!˜Rn + ˜R
∗
n
"+
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
+ Py
ν An,y(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + Px
ν An,z(Qz
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
,
in which C =
0N
n=1 hρn · I (constant).
Since an additive constant is
meaningless in the expression for the energy, we can neglect C.
This is all
the more desirable since C becomes inﬁnite for N →∞, and would therefore
upset the proper completion of the theory.
The Hermitian operator ˜R
∗
n˜Rn is hypermaximal, and in fact it has a pure
discrete spectrum consisting of the numbers 0, 1, 2, . . . .
The corresponding
eigenfunctions are denoted ψn
0 (˜qn), ψn
1 (˜qn), ψn
2 (˜qn) . . . .
(If we write
2π
/
h/ρnq in place of ˜qn then
√2hρn
2πρn˜qn = 2π
/
ρn/2h ˜qn and
√2hρn
ℏ
i
∂
∂˜qn =
2π
/
h/2ρn 1
i
∂
∂˜qn
go over into
√
2 q and
√
i
∂
∂q respectively, so that
˜Rn =
√
!
q + ∂
∂q
"
,
˜R
∗
n =
√
!
q + ∂
∂q
"
˜Rn˜R
∗
n = −1
∂2
∂q2 + 1
2q2 + 1
˜R
∗
n˜Rn = −1
∂2
∂q2 + 1
2q2 −1
The eigenvalue theory of these operators can be found in many treatises, for
example, Courant-Hilbert, page 261, formulas (42), (43) and related subject
matter, as well as page 76, formulas (60), (61); or Weyl, Gruppentheorie und
Quantenmechanik, page 74 and thereafter.)


6. Radiation Theory
Since the ψ1(ξ), ψ2(ξ), . . . form a complete orthogonal set in ξ-space, and
the ψn
0 (˜qn), ψn
1 (˜qn), . . . form one in ˜q-space, the functions
Φkm1...mN (ξ, ˜q1, . . . , ˜qN) = ψk(ξ) · ψ1
m1(˜q1) · · · ψN
mN (˜qN)
(k = 1, 2, . . .; m1, . . . , mM = 0, 1, 2, . . .) form a complete orthogonal set in
{ξ, ˜q1, . . . , ˜qN}-space; i.e., in the conﬁguration space.
We can then expand
φ = φ(ξ, ˜q1, . . . , ˜qN) as follows:
φ(ξ, ˜q1, . . . , ˜qN) =
∞
$
k=1
∞
$
m1=0
· · ·
∞
$
mN=0
akm1...mN Φkm1...mN (ξ, ˜q1, . . . , ˜qN)
=
∞
$
k=1
∞
$
m1=0
· · ·
∞
$
mN=0
akm1...mN ψk(ξ) · ψ1
m1(˜q1) · · · ψN
mN (˜qN)
It is of no signiﬁcance that we enumerate the complete orthogonal set and
the expansion coeﬃcients with N + 1 indices k, m1, . . . , mN instead of one.
Indeed, the considerations of II.2 justify this conclusion. The Hilbert space of
wave functions φ can also be interpreted as the space of (N + 1)-fold sequences
akm1...mN (with ﬁnite 0∞
k=1
0∞
m1=0 · · · 0∞
mN=0 |akm1...mN |2).
How in this latter context are we to describe the action of the operator
H? In order to answer this question let us ﬁrst evaluate HΦkm1...mN . Since H0
operates on ξ alone, and ψk(ξ) is an eigenfunction of H0 with eigenvalue wk, and
since moreover ˜R
∗
n˜Rn operates on ˜qn alone, and ψmn(˜qn) is the eigenfunction of
˜R
∗
n˜Rn with eigenvalue mn, we have
HΦkm1...mN =
'
wk+
N
$
n=1
hρnmn
(
Φkm1...mN
+
N
$
n=1
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
2πcMν
h
2ρn
+
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
+ Py
ν An,y(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + Pz
ν An,z(Qz
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν)
,
× ψk(ξ) · ψ1
m1(˜q1) · · ·
!˜Rn + ˜R
∗
n
"
ψn
mn(˜qn) · · · ψN
mN (˜qN)
For all operators A which (like those in the [· · ·] expression) aﬀect only the
variable ξ we can employ the expansion
Aψk(ξ) =
∞
$
j=1
(Aψk, ψj) · ψj(ξ) =
∞
$
j=1
Akj · ψj(ξ)
in which Akj = (Aψk, ψj). Furthermore, it is shown in the treatises cited above
that
˜Rnψn
m(˜qn) =
&
√m ψn
m−1(˜qn)
:
m = 1, 2, . . .
:
m = 0
˜R
∗
nψn
m(˜qn) =
√
m + 1 ψn
m+1(˜qn)
:
m = 0, 1, 2, . . .


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
Consequently
HΦkm1...mN =
'
wk+
N
$
n=1
hρnmn
(
Φkm1...mN
+
∞
$
j=1
N
$
n=1
h
2ρn
#
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
2πcMν
'
Px
ν An,ν(Qx
ν, Qx
ν, Qx
ν) + · · ·
(
kj
×
!√
mn + 1 Φkm1...mn+1...mN + √mn Φkm1...mn−1...mN
"
We can now portray H as an akm1...mN operator: writing
H
$
km1...mN
akm1...mN Φakm1...mN =
$
km1...mN
a′
km1...mN Φakm1...mN
we have
H akm1...mN = a′
km1...mN
with
a′
km1...mN =
'
wk+
N
$
n=1
hρnmn
(
akm1...mN
+
∞
$
j=1
N
$
n=1
h
2ρn
#
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
2πcMν
'
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qx
ν, Qx
ν) + · · ·
(
kj
×
!√
mn + 1 akm1...mn+1...mN + √mn akm1...mn−1...mN
"
The discussion of H has now been carried far enough for us to undertake
the transition to the limit N →∞. Since the system of indexing the akm1...mN
changes in the process, there arises an entirely new H operator.
We must
introduce components akm1m2 ... with inﬁnitely many indices m1, m2, . . . .
However, we must limit ourselves to sequences m1, m2, . . . in which only a ﬁnite
number of elements are diﬀerent from zero, if for no other reason than to ensure
the ﬁniteness of the sum
∞
$
n=1
hρnmn
appearing in H. From now on, therefore, the Hilbert space of all sequences
akm1m2 ... with ﬁnite
∞
$
k=1
∞
$
m1=0
∞
$
m2=0
· · · |akm1m2 ...|2
will be used in which the indices k, m1, m2, . . . range on
k = 1, 2, . . . ;
m1, m2, . . . = 0, 1, 2, . . .


6. Radiation Theory
with only a ﬁnite (but arbitrary) number of mn ̸= 0.144 The ﬁnal form of H is
then
Hakm1m2 ... = a′
km1m2 ...
=
'
wk +
∞
$
n=1
hρnmn
(
· akm1m2 ...
+
∞
$
j,n=1
W n
kj
'√
mn + 1 akm1m2 ...mn+1...
+ √mn akm1m2 ...mn−1...
(
in which W n
kj is deﬁned
W n
kj =
h
2ρn
ℓ
$
ν=1
eν
2πcMν
'
Px
ν An,ν(Qx
ν, Qx
ν, Qx
ν) + · · ·
(
kj
Before we draw from this result the physical conclusions that interest
us, we should recall that it was obtained on the basis of the electrodynamic
theory of radiation. We now want to determine whether or not the standard
quantum mechanical transformation which we performed suﬃces to account for
the deviations of radiation from the wave model—for its discrete-corpuscular
nature.
(Note that it would be quite reasonable to expect that in order to
achieve this one would have to start directly from a corpuscular model for light,
instead of quantizing the electromagnetic ﬁeld, as we did here.)
It can immediately be seen in our expression for H that something like
the corpuscular light quantum is included in it. Suppose that we neglect the
second term, which produces a sort of perturbation, and which—as we shall see
later—gives rise to the quantum jumps of the system S from one “stationary
state” to another. (This latter is the phenomenon which is actually of interest
to us, but is nevertheless less striking than attributes of the material system
S itself, which are already in evidence. As we shall see, those attributes arise
from the leading term in H.) After deletion of the second term, we have
Hakm1m2 ... =
'
wk +
∞
$
n=1
hρnmn
(
· akm1m2 ...
But this expression for the energy can be interpreted as follows: It is the energy
144 That the totality of these index systems k, m1, m2, . . . actually forms a
sequence can be shown most simply as follows: Let π1, π2, π3, . . . be the series
of prime numbers 2, 3, 5, . . . . The products πk−1
πm1
2 πm2
· · · are in reality ﬁnite,
because all mn = 0 with only a ﬁnite number of exceptions, and (except in those
exceptional cases) πmn
n+1 = 1. Then if k, m1, m2, . . . run through our entire set of
allowed possibilities the πk−1
πm1
2 πm2
· · · run through all numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . and
assume each value once. We can therefore use the πk−1
πm1
2 πm2
· · · to obtain a
simple running index for the akm1m2 ....


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
wk of the system S, increased by the amounts hρnmn (n = 1, 2, . . .). Hence it is
plausible to interpret the numbers mn = 0, 1, 2, . . . as the numbers of particles
with respective energies hρn. But hρn is precisely the energy which, according
to Einstein, has to be assigned to a light quantum of frequency ρn (see Note 134).
Consequently the structure of H1 justiﬁes the view that the electromagnetic
ﬁeld existing in H (less its electrostatic part)—i.e., L—actually consists of light
quanta with frequencies ρ1, ρ2, . . . and energies hρ1, hρ2, . . . . Furthermore, the
numbers of such particles are given by the indices m1, m2, . . . (= 0, 1, 2, . . .).
The fact that no other frequencies than ρ1, ρ2, . . . occur is made plausible by
the observation that these are the eigenfrequencies of the cavity H. Indeed the
vector potentials
An(x, y, z) · γ cos 2πρn(t −τ)
represent the only stationary electromagnetic oscillations possible in H.
While these speculations and interpretations are of only heuristic value,
a fully satisfactory and ﬁnal answer to our question can be obtained only if
it proves possible for us to arrive at the energy expression H by an argument
that proceeds from the light quantum model for the radiation L. That we ﬁrst
proceeded from the classical theory of radiation is due to the fact that the
pre-quantum mechanical light quantum hypothesis supplied no expression for
the interaction energy of a light quantum with matter (the reinterpretation of
classical electrodynamics never succeeded in this respect). Now, however, we
will be able to determine this interaction term by comparison of coeﬃcients if our
result (to be derived by use of a non-specialized expression for the interaction
energy) coincides in form with H.
What is the state space of L (Question 1, page 161) on the basis of the
light quantum hypothesis? A single light quantum (in the space H) may be
characterized by certain coordinates whose totality we shall represent by the
symbol u.145 Its stationary states may have the wave functions ψ1(u), ψ2(u), . . .
145 As coordinates of the light quantum we may want to use, for example, its
momenta
px, py, pz
as
well
as
a
coordinate
π
describing
its
state
of
polarization.
The momenta determine the direction of the light quantum
—i.e., its direction cosines αx, αy, αz (α2
x+α2
y+α2
z = 1)—as well as its frequency
ν, its wavelength λ and its energy, because according to Einstein the momentum
vector has magnitude hν/c (see Note 134). Therefore
px = hν
c αx,
py = hν
c αy,
pz = hν
c αz
i.e.,
ν = c
h
p2x + p2y + p2z,
λ = c
ν ,
Energy = hν
αx =
c
hν px,
αy =
c
hν py,
αz =
c
hν pz
It is disturbing to observe that our eigen-oscillations An(x, y, z)·γ cos 2πρn(t−τ)
here are standing waves, as could not otherwise be possible in the cavity H
because of its reﬂecting walls, so that An can be related to no unique “ray


6. Radiation Theory
(which form an orthonormal set) and the energies E1, E2, . . . . These correspond
to the electromagnetic eigen-oscillations A1,A2, . . . with frequencies ρ1, ρ2, . . .
(in the sense of the Einstein concept En = hρn, which we shall also prove). In
this regard, the following point must be noted: In the electromagnetic discussion
we so normalized the energy of the light that its minimum value was 0, which
corresponded to the indices m1 = m2 = · · · = 0. In eﬀect, we have recognized
non-existence as a possible state of the light, which is in fact justiﬁed. Yet to
quantum mechanics in general such a concept is entirely foreign: each particle
contributes coordinates to the state space of the system, and therefore enters
so intimately into the formal description of the total system that it appears
to be eﬀectively indestructible. After its annihilation, then, we must ascribe
to the particle a sort of latent existence, in which its coordinates are still part
of the description of the conﬁguration space. Consequently, one of the states
direction” αx, αy, αz. We can see immediately that, along with αx, αy, αz, at
least the opposite direction −αx, −αy, −αz is also present, and the same holds
for the momentum. As a consequence, we must use other coordinates in H
than pz, py, pz, π. In some recent expositions of this subject this inconvenience
has been overcome by the following artiﬁce: Let H be a parallelepiped
−A < x < A,
−B < y < B,
−C < z < C
whose boundary surfaces x = ±A, y = ±B, z = ±C are not treated as
reﬂecting walls. Rather x = +A is identiﬁed with x = −A; y = +B with y = −B;
z = +C with z = −C. That is, radiation that impinges at A, y, z resumes at
−A, y, z its progress in the same direction (back again into H) as if nothing had
happened, etc. (see, for example, the treatment of L. Landau and R. Peierls, Z.
Physik 62 (1930)). We can also say that the space is taken to be periodic in the
x, y, z directions with respective periods 2A, 2B, 2C. The analytical treatment
remains the same, but the boundary condition is now
A(A, y, z) = A(−A, y, z)
A(x, B, z) = A(x, −B, z)
A(x, y, C) = A(x, y, −C)
(instead of
∂
∂nA = 0 at the boundary) and the “elementary solutions” with
which we perform the expansions are the functions
cos
sin
-
2πν
!
t −c(αxx + αyy + αzz)
".
(instead of A(x, y, z) · ˜q(t)). We can easily determine the
ν = ρn,
αx = αn,x,
αy = αn,y,
αz = αn,z
belonging to the eigen-solutions, and the further development of the theory
coincides with that of the text.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
ψn(u), with energy En = 0, must correspond to the non-existence of the light
quantum. We will write ψ0(u) to denote that state, so that ψ1(u), ψ2(u), . . .
refer to the state of a light quantum that actually exists. But we must include
the former to form the complete orthogonal set ψ0(u), ψ1(u), ψ2(u), . . . .
We proceed now to the consideration of L; i.e., the system of all light
quanta.
We include all the light quanta that can ever be represented in L
—including non-existent light quanta—which are inﬁnite in number. But since
it is inconvenient to operate with inﬁnitely many constituents in L, we ﬁrst
contemplate the existence of only S light quanta, and at the end pass to the
limit S →∞.146 We designate these light quanta by the numbers 1, 2, . . . , S
and call their coordinates u1, . . . , uS. The conﬁguration space of L is therefore
described by u1, . . . , uS, and that of S+L by ξ, u1, . . . , uS. The most general
wave function for S+L is then f(ξ, u1, . . . , uS) and the φk(ξ)·ψn1(u1) · · · ψnS(uS)
form (as k ranges on 1, 2, . . . and the n1, . . . , nS range on 0, 1, 2, . . .) a complete
orthonormal set.
Light quanta have now the fundamental property of being exactly identical;
i.e., there is no conceivable way to distinguish between two light quanta that
have the same coordinate u. Put another way: a state in which the light quanta
m and n have the corresponding u-values u′ and u′′ is not distinguishable from
the state in which um = u′′ and un = u′. But this is a classical—not a quantum
mechanical—description of the point at issue, since we speak of the value of u,
not of the wave function φ(u): quantum mechanically, this means that the
states belonging to the wave functions
f(ξ, u1, . . . , um, . . . , un, . . . uS)
and
f(ξ, u1, . . . , un, . . . , um, . . . uS)
are indistinguishable.
That is, each physical quantity R has the same
expectation value in both (therefore, since this also holds for F(R), each
physical quantity has also the same statistics; see the discussion of E1 and E2
in III.3). If we denote the functional operation which permutes um, un by Omn
(Omn is simultaneously Hermitian and unitary, O2
mn = I, as is immediately
evident), then this means that R has the same value for f as for Omnf; i.e.,
(Rf, f) = (ROmnf, Omnf) = (OmnROmnf, f)
Therefore
R = OmnR Omn
equivalently
OmnR = R Omn
This
means
that
in
the
present
context
only
such
operators
R
are
admissible which commute with all Omn (m, n = 1, 2, . . . , S); i.e., (with
reference to the deﬁnition of the Omn) into which all the coordinates u1, . . . , uS
enter symmetrically.
146 This transition to the limit S →∞is diﬀerent from the limit transition
N →∞taken in the electromagnetic theory. For if we interpret the m1, m2, . . .
there as numbers of light quanta then N is a limit for the number of incoherent
light quanta (i.e., of light quanta not of the same frequency and direction
—these together make up its momentum—and polarization; see Note 143),
while S is a limit for the total number of light quanta.


6. Radiation Theory
A wave function f which is symmetrical in all variables u1, . . . , uS, i.e.,
for which Omnf = f holds (m, n = 1, . . . , S; m ̸= n), is transformed by such
an operator R into one of the same kind: OmnRf = R Omnf = Rf. These
f form a closed manifold, a Hilbert subspace R
(S)
∞in the Hilbert space R(S)
∞
of all f, and the R map elements of R
(S)
∞onto that same space; i.e., they can
be regarded as operators in the Hilbert space R
(S)
∞. Consequently R
(S)
∞is just
as useful for the purposes of quantum mechanics as the space R(S)
∞originally
considered, and in view of the symmetry of L with respect to exchanges of light
quanta the question arises as to whether one cannot limit oneself to symmetric
wave functions; i.e., whether R(S)
∞should be replaced by R
(S)
∞.
We shall do
this, and the end result—i.e., the complete agreement which will be achieved
with the H-expression derived electromagnetically—will ultimately justify our
decision to do so.147
The φk(ξ)·ψn1(u1) · · · ψnS(uS) formed a complete orthonormal set in R(S)
∞.
Making use of this fact, we shall now form one in R
(S)
∞.
Let m0, m1, . . .
be any numbers (drawn from {0, 1, 2, . . .}) with m0 + m1 + · · · = S (therefore
only a ﬁnite number of them diﬀer from zero). We denote by [m1, m2, . . .] the
totality of all index systems n1, n2, . . . in which
0 appears m0 times
1 appears m1 times
...
k appears mk times
...
There are exactly m0! · m1! · m2! · · · such systems. We set
Φm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS) =
!
n1...nS in [m0,m1,...]
ψn1(u1) · · · ψnS(uS)
Since Φm0m1... is the sum of m0!·m1!·m2! · · · pairwise orthogonal summands
of magnitude 1, its square is the sum of m0! · m1! · · · m2! · · · terms of unit
magnitude, and the magnitude of Φm0m1... is therefore √m0! · m1! · · · m2! · · ·.
Two diﬀerent Φm0m1... have pairwise orthogonal summands, and are therefore
orthogonal. The functions
ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS) =
√m0! · m1! · · · m2! · · · Φm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
therefore form an orthonormal set. An f(ξ, u1, . . . uS) symmetric in u1, . . . uS
147 This introduction of R
(S)
∞in place of R(S)
∞is equivalent to replacing ordinary
statistics by so-called Bose-Einstein statistics, if we consider its consequences
without reference to quantum mechanics. See Dirac in the reference cited in
Note 138.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
has the same inner product with all sums of φk(ξ)Φm0m1...(u1, . . . uS) functions,
hence it is orthogonal to every such sum if it is orthogonal to those functions
individually; i.e., to φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . uS). And if it is orthogonal to each of
the latter it is orthogonal also to all φk(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψnS(uS), and therefore
it is 0. Consequently the φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . uS) (which themselves belong to
R
(S)
∞) form a complete orthonormal set in R
(S)
∞.
Let us now consider the three components of the energy of S + L. First,
there is the energy of S [2α, page 165], whose operator for S is deﬁned by
H0φk(ξ) = wkφk(ξ), and therefore for S + L by
H0 φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . uS) = wk φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . uS)
Second [2β ], each light quantum ℓ′ has energy Hℓ′ψn(u) = Enψn(u). Therefore
the mth quantum in S + L has energy
Hℓmφk(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψnm(um) · · · ψnS(uS)
= Enmφk(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψnm(um) · · · ψnS(uS)
from which we form
Hℓ= Hℓ1 + · · · + HℓS
Finally [2γ ], let the interaction energy of a light quantum ℓ′ with S be described
by an operator V—at present not known exactly—which we identify by its
matrix elements
Vℓ′ φk(ξ)ψn(u) =
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
p=0
Vkn|jpφj(ξ)ψp(u)
In S + L, for the mth light quantum, we then have
Vℓmφk(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψnm(um) · · · ψnS(uS)
=
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
p=0
Vknm|jp φj(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψp(um) · · · ψnS(uS)
=
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
p1...pm...pS=0
δ(n1 −p1) · · · Vknm|jpm · · · δ(nS −pS)
× φj(ξ) · ψp1(u1) · · · ψpm(um) · · · ψpS(uS)
—here δ(n) =
"
1 for n = 0
0 for n ̸= 0
#
—and must form
Hi = Vℓ1 + · · · + VℓS


6. Radiation Theory
Altogether, we now have
H φk(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψnS(uS)
= (wk + En1 + · · · + EnS) φk(ξ) · ψn1(u1) · · · ψnS(uS)
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
p1...pm...pS=0
S
!
m=1
δ(n1 −p1) · · · Vknm|jpm · · · δ(nS −pS)
× φj(ξ) · ψp1(u1) · · · ψpS(uS)
By a simple transformation this becomes
H φk(ξ)Φm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
=
$
wk +
∞
!
n=0
mnEn
%
φk(ξ)Φm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n,p=0
mnVkn|jp φj(ξ)Φm0m1...mn−1...mp+1...(u1, . . . , uS)
where in the case n = p the subscript m0m1...mn−1...mp+1... is to be replaced by
m0m1......mn....... When expressed in terms of the orthonormal functions this
result becomes
H φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
=
$
wk +
∞
!
n=0
mnEn
%
φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n,p=0
&
mn(mp + 1 −δ(n −p)) Vkn|jp
× φj(ξ)ψm0m1...mn−1...mp+1...(u1, . . . , uS)
We can expand the general f(ξ, u1, . . . , uS) of R
(S)
∞in terms of these
orthonormal functions:
f(ξ, u1, . . . , uS) =
∞
!
k=1
∞
!
m0m1...=0
ak m0m1...φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
m1+m2+ ··· = S
Therefore R
(S)
∞can be conceived as the Hilbert space of sequences ak m0m1...
with k = 1, 2, . . . ; m0, m1, . . . = 0, 1, 2, . . . ; m1 + m2 + . . . = S and with ﬁnite
!
k m0m1...
|ak m0m1...|2
In that language, the deﬁning action of H reads Hak m0m1... = a′
k m0m1... which


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
when spelled out in detail means
H
∞
!
k=1
∞
!
m0m1...=0
ak m0m1...φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
m1+m2+ ··· = S
=
∞
!
k=1
∞
!
m0m1...=0
a′
k m0m1...φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
m1+m2+ ··· = S
where results now in hand supply
a′
k m0m1... =
$
wk +
∞
!
n=0
mnEn
%
ak m0m1...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n,p=0
&
mn(mp + 1 −δ(n −p)) Vkn|jp
× aj m0m1...mn−1...mp+1...
(Here the subscripts k, j and n, p have exchanged roles relative to those in the
φk(ξ)ψm0m1...(u1, . . . , uS) formula; in place of Vjp|kn we have written Vkn|jp,
keeping in mind the Hermitian nature of V.)
We proceed now to prepare for the transition to the limit S →∞. Since
m0 is determined by m1, m2, . . . (use m0 = S −m1 −m2 −· · ·) we can write
ak m1m2... in place of ak m0m1m2.... In this way the ranges of the indices become
k = 1, 2, . . . ;
m1, m2, . . . = 0, 1, 2, . . . ;
m1 + m2 + · · · ⩽S
If we consider E0 = 0 and introduce the notation
SVk0|j0 = Vk|j
√
SVk0|jn = Vk|jn
√
SVkn|j0 = V j|kn
:
Vkn|jp is Hermitian!
then Hak m1m2... = a′
k m1m2... with
a′
k m1m2... =
$
wk +
∞
!
n=1
mnEn
%
ak m1m2...
+
∞
!
j=1
Vk|j aj m1m2...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n=1
√
mn
√1 + S −m1 −m2 −· · ·
√
S
Vj|kn aj m1m2...mn−1...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n=1
√
mn + 1
√S −m1 −m2 −· · ·
√
S
Vk|jnaj m1m2...mn+1...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n,p=1
&
mn(mp + 1) Vkn|jpaj m1m2...mn−1...mp+1...


6. Radiation Theory
Now let S →∞. The ak m1m2... are again deﬁned over all sequences k m1m2 . . .
with k = 1, 2, . . . ;
m1, m2, . . . = 0, 1, 2, . . . with only a ﬁnite (but arbitrary)
number of mn ̸= 0 (see Note 144). For H we obtain in the limit
Hak m1m2... = a′
k m1m2...
with
a′
k m1m2... =
$
wk +
∞
!
n=1
mnEn
%
ak m1m2...
+
∞
!
j=1
Vk|j aj m1m2...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n=1
√
mn + 1 Vj|kn aj m1m2...mn+1...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n=1
√
mn Vk|jnaj m1m2...mn−1...
+
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n,p=1
&
mn(mp + 1) Vkn|jpaj m1m2...mn−1...mp+1...
The similarity with the equation derived from the electromagnetic theory of
radiation is now apparent. To make the two identical (compare page 171) we
need only set
En = hρn,
Vk|j = 0,
Vk|jn = W n
jk = W n
kj,
Vkn|jp = 0
We then see that the light quanta concept proves to be identical to the classical
electromagnetic concept if we observe these rules:
1. The latter is rewritten according to the general quantum
mechanical scheme.
2. The energy of each light quantum is given by the Einstein
rule: En = hρn
3.
The interaction energy of light quanta with matter is
appropriately deﬁned (see the above expressions for V).
In this way one of the most diﬃcult paradoxes of the earlier form of the
quantum theory—dual nature of light (electromagnetic waves on the one hand,
discrete corpuscules or light quanta on the other)—is brilliantly resolved.148 To
be sure, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a direct, clear-cut interpretation of the interaction
energy V which has just been calculated. This is made even more diﬃcult by the
148 The reader will ﬁnd further discussion of how this “dual nature” was
conceived, and how paradoxical it was considered to be, in the contemporary
literature. See, for example, the works listed in Note 6.
It has often been said that quantum mechanics involves the same dual
nature, since discrete particles (electrons, protons) are also described by wave


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
circumstance that those individual matrix elements Vkn|jp which diﬀer from
zero (those with n ̸= 0, p = 0 or n = 0, p ̸= 0) depend upon the number S of all
possible light quanta (they are proportional to 1/
√
S), yet in the end one has
to eﬀect S →+∞. Nevertheless , we can accept this on the ground that each
model-dependent description is only an approximation, while the exact content
of the theory is furnished solely by the expression for the H operator.
We now return to our actual task: the determination of the transition
probabilities. In the sense of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger theory,the changes
in the ak m1m2... = ak m1m2...(t) are determined by
ℏ
i
∂
∂tak m1m2... = −Hak m1m2...
= −
$
wk +
∞
!
n=1
hρnmn
%
ak m1m2...
−
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n=1
W n
kj ·
'√
mn + 1aj m1m2...mn+1...
+
√
mnaj m1m2...mn−1...
(
Since the chief change of the ak m1m2... is caused by the ﬁrst term in this
expression, it is appropriate to separate this out by the substitution
ak m1m2...(t) = exp
)
−i
ℏ
$
wk +
∞
!
n=1
hρnmn
%
t
*
· bk m1m2...(t)
Then
∂
∂tbk m1m2... = i
ℏ
∞
!
j=1
∞
!
n=1
W n
kj ·
$
e−i
ℏ(wj−wk+hρn)t√
mn + 1 bj m1m2...mn+1...
−e−i
ℏ(wj−wk−hρn)t√
mnbj m1m2...mn−1...
%
The physical meaning of the ak m1m2... and bk m1m2... may be seen from
their origin: for ﬁnite ¯m0 + ¯m1 + ¯m2 + · · · = S, φ¯k(ξ)ψ ¯m0 ¯m1...(u1, . . . , uS)
was the state in which S is in the ¯kth quantum orbit and ¯m0, ¯m1, ¯m2, . . . light
quanta in the respective states ψ0, ψ1, ψ2, . . . are present; i.e., ¯m0 in the state of
“non-existence” and ¯m1, ¯m2, . . . in the states belonging to the corresponding
characteristic oscillations A1,A2, . . . .
The ak m1m2... belonging to this wave
functions, and exhibit typical wave properties. (See the experiments of Davison-
Germer, Phys. Rev. 50 (1927), PNAS 15, (1928); also C. F. Thomson, Proc.
Roy. Soc. 117 (1928) and Rupp, Ann.Physik 85 (1928).) In contrast with
this, however, it is to be noted that quantum mechanics derives both “natures”
from a single uniﬁed theory of elementary phenomena.
The paradox of the
earlier theory lay in the circumstance that one had to draw alternately on two
contradictory theories (the electromagnetic radiation theory of Maxwell-Hertz,
the light quantum theory of Einstein) for the explanation of experience.


6. Radiation Theory
function are then
ak m1m2... = δ(k −¯k) · δ(m1 −¯m1) · δ(m2 −¯m2) · · ·
(Only a ﬁnite number of those numbers diﬀer from 1 since mn = ¯mn = 0 with
only a ﬁnite number of exceptions.)
This, of course, remains valid also as
S →+∞.
For an arbitrary state ak m1m2...
of
S + L,
therefore,
the
conﬁguration mentioned above (if it is measured: see the comments in III.3
on the non-degenerate pure discrete spectrum) has the probability
+++
!
k m1m2...
ak m1m2...δ(k −¯k) · δ(m1 −¯m1) · δ(m2 −¯m2) · · ·
+++
= |a¯k ¯m1 ¯m2...|2
= |b¯k ¯m1 ¯m2...|2
In particular, the total probability that S will be found in the ¯kth quantum
orbit is
θ¯k =
!
¯m1 ¯m2...
|b¯k ¯m1 ¯m2...|2
Let an atom be initially (t = 0) in the ¯kth state, and let ¯m1, ¯m2, . . . identify
the light quanta in the respective states A1,A2, . . . that are assumed to be
initially present; i.e.,
bk m1m2...(0) = ak m1m2...(0) = δ(k −¯k) · δ(m1 −¯m1) · δ(m2 −¯m2) · · ·
In the sense of the above diﬀerential equation, and as a ﬁrst approximation
(i.e., for such short times that the right sides can still be considered constant),
only those ∂
∂tbk m1m2... will diﬀer from zero for which an m1, m2, . . . , mn +1, . . .
or an m1, m2, . . . , mn −1, . . . coincides with
¯m1, ¯m2, . . . ;
i.e., with all
k, ¯m1, ¯m2, . . . , ¯mn ± 1, . . . . If we integrate in this case, we ﬁnd
bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn+1...(t) = W n
k¯k
1 −e−i
ℏ(w¯k −wk −hρn)t
w¯k −wk −hρn
√
¯mn + 1
bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn−1...(t) = W n
k¯k
1 −e−i
ℏ(w¯k −wk + hρn)t
w¯k −wk −hρn
√
¯mn
All other bk m1m2... vanish in this approximation. (Except for b¯k ¯m1 ¯m2..., which
would equal 1 in this approximation; i.e., except for terms of order t2. Yet
the conclusion
∂
∂tbk ¯m1 ¯m2... = 0 is made doubtful in this case by the fact that
the right side of our diﬀerential equation contains an inﬁnite number of terms
bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn±1... which do not vanish in our approximation. Hence we cannot
argue from the smallness (for small t) of each of these terms to the smallness of
their sum. Actually, the calculation in the next order of approximation would
show that the deviation of b¯k ¯m1 ¯m2... from 1 is proportional not to t2 but to t.149
149 The exact solution of this diﬀerential equation was given by Weisskopf and
Wigner (Z. Physik 63 (1930)), and establishes the validity of these statements.


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
However, since
!
k m1m2...
|bk m1m2...|2 =
!
k m1m2...
|ak m1m2...|2 = 1
!
k m1m2...
|b¯k ¯m1 ¯m2...|2 = 1 −
!
k m1m2...̸= ¯k ¯m1 ¯m2...
|bk m1m2...|2
the direct determination of this bk m1m2... is not actually necessary.)
The qualitative signiﬁcance of the preceding results is clearly evident:
bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn+1...—which refers to the emission of an An light quantum (of
frequency ρn)—becomes larger as the denominator w¯k −wk −hρn becomes
smaller; i.e., the closer the light frequency ρn lies to the “Bohr frequency”
(w¯k−wk)/h.150 In the same way, bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn−1...—which refers to absorption—
increases as ρn becomes closer to (wk −w¯k)/h. We see that the Bohr frequency
relation does not hold exactly (of course, not all frequencies are placed at one’s
disposal by the ρn) but only with high probability if the time t is short and the
ρn are very dense (which will be the case if the cavity H is large). In addition,
the W n
k¯k aﬀect the frequency of occurence of such processes. We shall soon
identify them with the transition probabilities.
From our bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn±1...-formulae it follows151 that (for suﬃciently small
values of t)
|bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn+1...(t)|2 = 2
h2 ( ¯mn + 1) |W n
k¯k|2 1 −cos 2π
$
ρn −w¯k −wk
h
%
t
$
ρn −w¯k −wk
h
%2
|bk ¯m1 ¯m2... ¯mn−1...(t)|2 =
h2 ¯mn |W n
k¯k|2 1 −cos 2π
$
ρn −wk −w¯k
h
%
t
$
ρn −wk −w¯k
h
%2
|bk m1m2...(t)|2 = 0
for
km1m2 . . . ̸=
" ¯k ¯m1 ¯m2 . . .
or
k ¯m1 ¯m2 . . . ¯mn ± 1 . . .
From this we get for θk(t) (k ̸= ¯k)
150 N. Bohr, as is well known, stated the fundamental principle in 1913 (see the
reference cited in Note 5) that in transitions from a stationary state of energy
W (1) to a stationary state of energy W (2) < W (1) an atom emits radiation of
frequency (W (1) −W (2))/h. In our case, this corresponds to (w¯k −wk)/h.
151 We have
|eix −1|2 = (eix −1)(e−ix −1) = 2 −(eix + e−ix) = 2(1 −cos x)


6. Radiation Theory
θk(t) =
∞
!
n=1
h2 ( ¯mn + 1) |W n
k¯k|2 1 −cos 2π
$
ρn −w¯k −wk
h
%
t
$
ρn −w¯k −wk
h
%2
+
∞
!
n=1
h2 ¯mn |W n
k¯k|2 1 −cos 2π
$
ρn −wk −w¯k
h
%
t
$
ρn −wk −w¯k
h
%2
where the ﬁrst ,∞
n=1 refers to emission, the second ,∞
n=1 to absorption. In
order to be able to give these θk in closed form we must make simplifying
assumptions: we will, on the one hand, assume the volume of the enclosure H to
be very large (V →∞) and will, on the other hand, consider the characteristic
oscillations An in H statistically. For this purpose, we combine all terms in
the above summations which belong to ρn between ρ and ρ + dρ (for W n
k¯k we
introduce its value and assume dρ ≪ρ):
4π2c2hρ
-
!
n
+++
ℓ
!
ν=1
eν
Mν
'
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + · · ·
(
k¯k
+++
( ¯mn + 1)
.
ρ ⩽ρn<ρ+dρ
×
1 −cos 2π
$
ρ −w¯k −wk
h
%
t
$
ρ −w¯k −wk
h
%2
We then repeat this procedure, but with ¯mn in place of ¯mn+1 and (wk −w¯k)/h
in place of (w¯k −wk)/h.
The expressions in brackets [· · ·] are now to be
evaluated.
The customary method of describing the m1, m2, . . . is not by enumeration
of their values but much less—namely, the listing of their intensities; i.e., the
radiation energy I(ρ)dρ that lies in the spectral interval from ρ to ρ + dρ and
in unit volume. This means that
!
n
hρn · ¯mn
≈
hρ
!
n
¯mn = V · I(ρ)dρ
ρ ⩽ρn<ρ+dρ
ρ ⩽ρn<ρ+dρ
i.e.,
!
n
¯mn = V · I(ρ)dρ
hρ
ρ ⩽ρn<ρ+dρ
The number of ρn in the interval ρ ⩽ρn < ρ + dρ is
8πVρ2
c2
dρ
according to an asymptotic formula of Weyl (see the reference in Note 140)
which is valid generally, and therefore
!
n
( ¯m + 1) ≈
V
$
I(ρ) + 8πhρ3
c3
%
hρ
dρ
ρ ⩽ρn<ρ+dρ


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
If
+++
ℓ
!
ν=1
eν
Mν
'
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + · · ·
(
k¯k
+++
executes (suﬃciently rapid) ﬂuctuations in the interval ρ ⩽ρn < ρ + dρ (about
a mean value which we will call Wk¯k(ρ)) then the expressions [. . .] in question
become
Wk¯k(ρ)
V
$
I(ρ) + 8πhρ3
c3
%
hρ
dρ
and
Wk¯k(ρ)VI(ρ)
hρ dρ
If in addition we write ν¯kk for (w¯k −wk)/h, and νk¯k for (wk −w¯k)/h, then our
sums become
θk(t) =
V
4π2c2h2
/ ∞
0$
I(ρ) + 8πhρ3
c3
%
· 1 −cos 2π(ρ −ν¯kk) t
(ρ −ν¯kk)2
+I(ρ) · 1 −cos 2π(ρ −νk¯k) t
(ρ −νk¯k)2
Wk¯k(ρ)
ρ2
dρ
For small t this integral is evidently of order t2 (because 1 −cos 2πct is) except
in that part of the integration region in which the denominators (ρ −ν¯kk),
(ρ −νk¯k) are small. Here contributions can arise which are large in comparison
with t2, and when this is the case the contributions in question supply
asymptotic evaluations for θk(t).
It will be shown that this is actually the
case, because we shall obtain contributions of order t.
Since ν¯kk = −νk¯k = (w¯k −wk)/h, for w¯k > wk only the denominator of
the ﬁrst term can become small, while for w¯k < wk only the denominator of
the second term, so according as w¯k is > or < wk it is the ﬁrst or second term
which predominates; the other term will be abandoned. Moreover, since the ρ
that lie remote from ν¯kk and νk¯k contribute only in order t2 to the integral, we
can replace some of the factors in the surviving integrand by the values which
they assume at the dominant value of ρ. Thus do we obtain
θk(t) = VIWk¯k(¯νk¯k)
4π2c2h2¯ν2
k¯k
/ ∞
1 −cos 2π(ρ −¯νk¯k)t
(ρ −¯νk¯k)2
dρ
where we have adopted the abbreviation ¯νk¯k = |w¯k −wk|/h and where
I =



I(¯νk¯k) + 8πh
c3 ¯ν3
k¯k
for
w¯kk > wk¯k : radiative case
I(¯νk¯k)
for
w¯kk < wk¯k : absorptive case
Since this again leads only to a t2 contribution, we can replace
5 ∞
by
5 +∞
−∞and


6. Radiation Theory
introduce the new variable x = 2π(ρ −¯νk¯k)t. Then152
/ +∞
−∞
1 −cos 2π(ρ −¯νk¯k)t
(ρ −¯νk¯k)2
dρ = 2πt
/ +∞
−∞
1 −cos x
x2
dx = 2π2t
so ﬁnally
θk(t) = VIWk¯k(¯νk¯k)
2h2¯ν2
k¯k
t
with which it is also established that θk(t) is of order t.
In order to evaluate Wk¯k(¯νk¯k) we must ﬁnd an expression for
+++
ℓ
!
ν=1
eν
Mν
'
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + · · ·
(
k¯k
+++
which is free of An. This can be obtained if we replace An (considering its rapid
ﬂuctuations) by an irregularly oriented vector of constant length. Because of its
spatial constancy (i.e., its {Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν}-independence) such a vector is a number
vector times the unit matrix I, and its constant length γn can be obtained from
the normalization condition
///
H
[An,An]dxdydz = 4πc2
Therefore
Vγ2
n = 4πc2
i.e.,
γ2
n = 4πc2
V
On average,
3 of [An,An] = An,x
+ An,y
+ An,z
= γ2
n contributes to the
x-component An,x
.
Hence
3γ2
n =
3πc2/V and similarly for An,y
and An,z
.
Consequently, we have
Wk¯k(ρ) =
mean
+++
ℓ
!
ν=1
eν
Mν
'
Px
ν An,x(Qx
ν, Qy
ν, Qz
ν) + · · ·
(
k¯k
+++
ρ ⩽ρn<ρ+dρ
≈4πc2
3V
6+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eν
Mν Px
ν
%
k¯k
+++
+ · · ·
152 Here we use (see Courant-Hilbert, page 49)
/ +∞
−∞
1 −cos x
x2
dx = 2
/ ∞
1 −cos x
x2
dx
=
/ ∞
1 −cos 2y
y
dy = 2
/ ∞
sin2 y
y2
dy = π


Chapter III: The Quantum Statistics
Since H0, the energy of the system S alone, is equal to the kinetic energy
plus the potential energy it has therefore the form
H0 =
ℓ
!
ν=1
2M ν
8'
Px
ν
(2 +
'
Py
ν
(2 +
'
Pz
ν
(29
+ V
'
Qx
1, Qy
1, Qz
1, . . . , Qx
ℓ, Qy
ℓ, Qz
ℓ
(
in view of which one has153
H0Qx
ν −Qx
νH0 = ℏ
i
M ν Px
ν
Since H0 is a diagonal matrix with diagonal matrix elements w1, w2, . . .
(which is to say: (H0)kj = wkδkj) it follows from this that
(Px
ν)k¯k = i
ℏMν(H0Qx
ν −Qx
νH0)k¯k
= i
ℏMν(wk −w¯k)(Qx
ν)k¯k
= ±i · 2πMν¯νk¯k(Qx
ν)k¯k
Therefore
Wk¯k(ρ) = 16π3c2
3Vh2 ¯ν2
k¯k
6+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eνQx
ν
%
k¯k
+++
+ · · ·
Substitution into the previously-obtained expression for θk(t) results in
θk(t) = I 8π3
3h2
6+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eνQx
ν
%
k¯k
+++
+ · · ·
t
If we set
Wk¯k =
+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eνQx
ν
%
k¯k
+++
+ · · ·
this result is evidently to be interpreted as follows: The atom S in the kth state
executes the following transitions (quantum jumps):
1. A transition k →¯k into a higher state (w¯k > wk) occurs
I 8π3
3h2 Wk¯k · w¯k −wk
h
times per second; i.e., at a rate proportional to the intensity of the
radiation ﬁeld at the corresponding Bohr frequency (w¯k −wk)/h.
153 Px
ν commutes with all Qx
µ, Qy
µ, Qz
µ, Px
µ, Py
µ, Pz
µ except Qx
ν. In fact
Px
νQx
ν −Qx
νPx
ν = ℏ
i I
Therefore
H0Qx
ν −Qx
νH0 =
2Mν (Px
ν)2Qx
ν −Qx
ν
2Mν (Px
ν)2 = ℏ
i
Mν Px
ν
See Note 143.


6. Radiation Theory
2. A transition ¯k ←k into a lower state (w¯k < wk) occurs
I 8π3
3h2 Wk¯k · wk −w¯k
h
times per second; i.e., at a rate proportional to the intensity of the
radiation ﬁeld at the corresponding Bohr frequency (wk −w¯k)/h.
3. A transition ¯k ←k into a lower state (w¯k < wk) also occurs
64π4
3hc3 Wk¯k ·
$wk −w¯k
h
%3
times per second; i.e., in complete independence of the ambient
radiation ﬁeld.
Process 1 refers to absorption from the radiation ﬁeld; 2 to emission which
is induced by the radiation ﬁeld. Process 3 refers, however, to spontaneous
emission which the atom will always undergo, so long as it has not attained
complete stability in its lowest stationary state (minimum wk).
The three transition mechanisms1–3 were alreadyfoundthermodynamically
by Einstein before the discovery of quantum mechanics;154 only the value of the
“transition probability” was lacking. The above value
Wk¯k =
+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eνQx
ν
%
k¯k
+++
+
+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eνQy
ν
%
k¯k
+++
+
+++
$
ℓ
!
ν=1
eνQz
ν
%
k¯k
+++
is, as we have already mentioned, contained in the ﬁrst interpretation
contributed by Heisenberg. We have now obtained it again (by Dirac’s method)
from the general theory.
154 Physik Z. 18 (1917).


 


CHAPTER IV
DEDUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE THEORY
1. THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF THE STATISTICAL THEORY
In Chapter III we succeeded in reducing all assertions of quantum mechanics
to the statistical formula (called there E2)
E
Exp(R, φ) = (Rφ, φ)
(Here Exp(R, φ) is the expectation value of the quantity R in the state φ, and R
is the operator belonging to R.) In the course of the following discussion we will
see how this formula itself can be derived from a few qualitative assumptions,
and simultaneously we will check the entire structure of quantum mechanics as
it was developed in Chapter III. Before we do this, however, a further remark
is necessary.
In the state φ the quantity R has the expectation value ρ = (Rφ, φ) and
has as its dispersion ϵ2 the expectation value of the quantity (R −ρ)2; i.e.,
ϵ2 = ((R −ρ · I)2φ, φ) = ∥Rφ∥2 −(Rφ, φ)2 (see Note 130; all these are calculated
with the aid of E!), which is in general > 0 (and = 0 only for Rφ = ρφ;
see III.3).
Therefore there exists a statistical distribution of R even though
φ is one individual state, as we have repeatedly noted. But such statistical
considerations acquire a new aspect when we do not even know what state is
actually present—for example, when states φ1, φ2, . . . might be present with
respective probabilities w1, w2, . . . (all non-negative, and sum to unity). Then
the expectation value of the quantity R, in the sense of the generally valid rules
of the calculus of probabilities, is ρ′ = !
n wn · (Rφn, φn).
Now in general (Rφ, φ) = Tr(P[φ] · R).
Indeed, if we select a complete
orthonormal set ψ1, ψ2, . . . with ψ1 = φ (therefore ψ2, ψ3, . . . are orthogonal


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
to φ), then
P[φ]ψn =
"
φ
for
n = 1
for
n ̸= 1
and therefore
Tr(P[φ] · R) =
#
m,n
(P[φ]ψn, ψm)(Rψm, ψn)
=
#
m
(φ, ψm)(Rψm, φ) = (Rφ, φ)
whence our ρ′ = Tr
$% !
n wmP[φn]
&
· R
'
. The operator
U =
#
n
wnP[φn]
is deﬁnite because of the deﬁniteness of all P[φn] and wn ⩾0, and its trace is
equal to !
n wn = 1 since TrP[φn] = 1. It provides a complete characterization
of the mixture just described, so far as concerns its statistical properties:
ρ′ = Tr(UR)
We shall have to pay attention to such mixtures of states, in addition
to the individual states themselves. We turn ﬁrst, however, to more general
investigations.
Let us forget the whole of quantum mechanics but retain the following:
Suppose that a system S155 is given, which is characterized for experimenters
155 It is important to emphasize the conceptual diﬀerence between a system
as such and a system in a certain state.
This is an example of a system:
a hydrogen atom; i.e., an electron and proton with the known forces acting
between them. It is described formally by these data: the conﬁguration space
has six dimensions; the coordinates are q1, . . . , q6; the momenta are p1, . . . , p6;
the Hamiltonian function is
H(q1, . . . , q6, p1, . . . , p6) = p2
1 + p2
2 + p2
2me
+ p2
4 + p2
5 + p2
2mp
+
e2
(
(q1 −q4)2 + (q2 −q5)2 + (q3 −q6)2
A state is then determined by additional data. In classical mechanics this is done
by assigning numerical initial values q0
1, . . . , q0
6, p0
1, . . . , p0
6 to the coordinates
and momenta; in quantum mechanics by specifying the initial wave function
φ0(q1. . . . , q6). One never needs more information than this: if both system and
state are known, then the theory gives unambiguous directions for answering
all questions by calculation.


1. Fundamental Basis of the Statistical Theory
by the enumeration of all the eﬀectively measurable quantities in it and their
functional relations with one another. With each quantity we include directions
as to how it is to be measured, and how its value is to be read or calculated from
the indicator positions on the measuring instruments. If R is a quantity and
f(x) any function, then the quantity f(R) is deﬁned as follows: To measure
f(R) we measure R and ﬁnd the value a (for R). Then f(R) has the value
f(a). As we see, all quantities f(R) (R ﬁxed, f(x) arbitrary) are measured
simultaneously
with
R.
This
is
a
ﬁrst
example
of
simultaneously
measurable quantities.
In general, we call two (or more) quantities R, S
simultaneously measurable in the same system if there is an arrangement that
measures both simultaneously in the same system—except that their respective
values are to be calculated in diﬀerent ways from the instrument readings.
(In classical mechanics, as is well known, all quantities are simultaneously
measurable, but this is not the case in quantum mechanics, as we have seen
in III.3.)
Given such quantities and a function f(x, y) of two variables, we
can also deﬁne the quantity f(R, S).
This is measured if we measure R, S
simultaneously. If the values a, b are found for these, then the value of f(R, S)
is f(a, b). But it should be realized that it is completely meaningless to try
to form f(R, S) if R, S are not simultaneously measurable: there is no way to
construct the corresponding experimental arrangement.
However, investigation of the physical quantities related to a single object
S is not the only thing which can be done—especially if doubts exist concerning
the simultaneous measurability of several quantities. In such cases it is possible
to construct statistical ensembles which consist of many systems S1, . . . , SN
(i.e., N copies of S, N large).156 In such an ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] we do not
measure the “value” of a quantity R but its distribution of values; i.e., for
each interval a′ < a ⩽a′′ (a′, a′′ given, a′ ⩽a′′) we look to the number of
systems among the S1, . . . , SN for which the value of R lies in the interval and—
dividing by N—obtain the probability function w(a′, a′′) = w(a′′) −w(a′).157
156 Such ensembles—sometimes called collectives—are in general necessary for
establishing probability theory as a theory of frequencies.
They were
introduced by R. von Mises, who discovered their meaning for probability theory
and who built a complete theory on this foundation (see, for example, his book
Wahrscheinlichkeit, Statistik und ihre Wahreheit, Berlin, 1928).
w(a′) is the probability of a ⩽a′; i.e., that a falls within the interval
{−∞, a′ ]. This w(a)—or, as we shall call it, wR(a) in order to emphasize its
dependence on R—is easily seen to have the following properties:
0 ←wR(a)
as
−∞←a
wR(a) →1
as
a →+∞
for a ⩾a0 : a0 ←a =⇒wR(a0) ←wR(a)
a′ ⩽a′′ =⇒wR(a′) ⩽wR(a′′)
(In quantum mechanics, if E(λ) is the resolution of the identity belonging to
R then wR(a) = ∥E(a)φ∥2 = (E(a)φ, φ).) If wR(a) is diﬀerentiable then the


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
The essential advantages of the observation of such ensembles are these:
1.
Even if the measurement of a quantity R should alter the
measured system S to an important degree (in quantum mechanics
this may be actually the case, and in III.4 we saw that this is
necessarily so in the physics of elementary processes, since the
measurement’s interference with the observed system is of the same
order of magnitude as the system or its observed parts), the
statistical determination of the probability distribution of R in the
ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] will alter this ensemble arbitrarily little if N
is suﬃciently large.
2. Even if two (or more) quantities R, S in a single system S are
not simultaneously measurable, their probability distributions in a
given ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] can be obtained with arbitrary accuracy
if N is suﬃciently large.
Indeed, with an ensemble of N elements it suﬃces to carry out the
statistical inspections not on all N elements of S1, . . . , SN but on any subset of
M ⩽N elements—say, [S1, . . . , SM]—provided that M, N are both large and
that M is very small compared to N.158 Then only the M/N th part of the
ensemble is aﬀected by the changes which result from the measurement. The
eﬀect is an arbitrarily small one if M/N is chosen to be small enough, which is
possible for suﬃciently large N, even in the case of large M, as was stated in 1.
In order to measure two (or several) quantities R, S simultaneously we need
two ensembles—say [S1, . . . , SM] and [S M+1, . . . , S 2M] (2M ⩽N)—of such a
type that the ﬁrst is employed in obtaining the statistics of R, and the second
in obtaining those of S. The two measurements therefore do not disturb each
other, although they are performed in the same ensemble [S1, . . . , SN], and they
change this ensemble only by an arbitrarily small amount if 2M/N is suﬃciently
small, which is possible for suﬃciently large N even in the case of large M, as
was stated in 2.
We see that the introduction of statistical ensembles—i.e., of probability
methods—is undertaken because of the possibility of aﬀecting a single system by
measurement,
and
the
possibility
that
several
quantities
may
not
be
measurable simultaneously. Ageneral theory must consider these circumstances,
since their appearance in elementary processes had always been suspected,159
ordinary “probability density”
d
dawR(a) can be introduced in its place; if it is
not continuous (from the left) at a = a0 then the single point a = a0 has the
“discrete probability” wR(a0) −wR(a0 −0). But the general concept which is
meaningful under all conditions is wR(a): see the reference in Note 156.
158 This follows from the so-called Law of Large Numbers, the theorem of
Bernoulli.
159 So, for example, it was considered to constitute a basic diﬃculty in deﬁning
the electric ﬁeld that the electrical test charge to be used cannot be smaller than
the charge of an electron.


1. Fundamental Basis of the Statistical Theory
and their reality is now an established certainty, as the detailed discussion of
the situation makes clear (see III.4). The use of statistical ensembles eliminates
these diﬃculties, and again makes possible an objective description (which is
independent of chance, as well as of whether one measures—in a given state—
the one or the other of two not simultaneously measurable quantities).
For such ensembles it is not surprising that a physical quantity R does not
have a sharp value; i.e., that its distribution function does not consist of a single
value a0,160 but that several values or intervals are possible, and that a positive
dispersion exists.160 Two diﬀerent reasons for this are a priori conceivable:
I. The individual systems S1, . . . , SN of our ensemble can be in
diﬀerent states, so that the ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] is shaped by the
relative frequencies of those states. The fact that we do not obtain
sharp values for the physical quantities in this case is caused by
our lack of information: we do not know in which state we are
measuring, and therefore cannot predict the results.
II. The individual systems S1, . . . , SN are in the same state, but the
laws of nature are not causal. Then the cause of the dispersion is
not our lack of information, but nature itself, which has disregarded
the “principle of suﬃcient cause.”
Case I is generally well known, while Case II is important and new. To be
sure, we will be skeptical at ﬁrst of such a possibility, but we ﬁnd an objective
criterion that will enable us to decide whether it is or is not possible to entertain
such an idea. It appears at ﬁrst that serious objections can be raised about the
conceivability and meaningfulness of such a notion, but we believe that these
objections are not valid, and that certain diﬃculties (for example, in quantum
mechanics) permit no other way out but II. We therefore apply ourselves to
discussion of the conceptual diﬃculties posed by II.
The sharp value a0 corresponds to the probability function
wR(a) =
"
for
a ⩾a0
for
a < a0
In this case—and only in this—the dispersion ϵ2 is zero. The mean value and
the dispersion are in general calculated as follows (these are Stieltjes integrals!):
ρ =
) +∞
−∞adwR(a)
ϵ2 =
) +∞
−∞(a −ρ)2 dwR(a)
=
) +∞
−∞a2 dwR(a) −2ρ
) +∞
−∞adwR(a) + ρ2
=
) +∞
−∞a2 dwR(a) −ρ2
=
) +∞
−∞a2 dwR(a) −
*) +∞
−∞adwR(a)
+2
(See III.4, Note 130.)


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
One might raise against II the objection that nature cannot possibly violate
the “principle of suﬃcient cause”—i.e., causality—because this is merely a
deﬁnition of identity. That is, the proposition that two identical objects S1, S2—
i.e., two replicas of the system S which are in the same state—will remain
identical in all conceivable identical circumstances is true because it is
tautological. For if S1, S2 could react diﬀerently to identical interactions (for
example: if they responded with diﬀerent values to measurement of the same
quantity R) then we would not have called them identical.
Therefore, in
an ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] which as dispersion relative to a quantity R, the
individual systems S1, . . . , SN cannot (by deﬁnition) all be in the same state.
(The application to quantum mechanics would be: Since one can obtain diﬀerent
values in the measurement of the same quantity R in several systems all of
which are in the same state φ—not an eigenstate of the operator R associated
with R161—these systems cannot be equal to one another; i.e., the description
of state provided by the wave function cannot be complete. Therefore other
variables must exist, the “hidden parameters” mentioned in III.2. We will soon
see what diﬃculties this presents.) In a large statistical ensemble, therefore, as
long as any physical quantity R is found to exhibit dispersion the possibility
must exist of resolving the ensemble into several diﬀerently constituted parts
(according to the various states of their respective elements). This procedure
is made all the more plausible by the observation that a simple method for
achieving such a resolution seems to exist: namely, we can look to the various
values which R has in the ensemble. After a subdivision or resolution relative
to all possible quantities R, S, T, . . . has been carried out a truly homogeneous
ensemble would then be obtained. At the end of the process these quantities
would have no further dispersion in any of the sub-ensembles.
But, ﬁrst of all, the statements contained in the last sentence are incorrect
because we did not consider the fact that the act of measurement changes the
measured system. If we measure R (which we will assume for simplicity can have
only two values: a1, a2) for all objects and get perhaps a1 on S1
′, . . . , SN1
′
and a2
on S1
′′, . . . , SN2
′′ (N1 + N2 = N), then there is no dispersion in [S1
′, . . . , SN1
′ ] and
none in [S1
′′, . . . , SN2
′′ ] (R has always the value a1 or a2 respectively). Still, this
is not merely a resolution of [S1, . . . , SN] into the two sets mentioned, because
the individual systems would be changed by the R measurement. It is true that
by I we have a method to determine the distribution R-values in such a way
that [S1, . . . , SN] is changed only slightly (we measure only in [S1, . . . , SM] with
M large, M/N small). This procedure, however, does not lead to the desired
resolution since for most of the S1, . . . , SN (namely SM+1, . . . , SN) it does not
make certain what value R has in each one of them.
We show now that the method given above fails to produce completely
homogeneous ensembles. Use a second physical quantity S (assumed again to
have only two values: b1, b2) to resolve [S1
′, . . . , SN1
′ ] into sub-ensembles
161 We contemplate independent measurements on several systems: successive
measurements on the same system would always give the same result (see III.3).


1. Fundamental Basis of the Statistical Theory
[S1
′, . . . , SN1
′ ] = [S1
′◦, . . . , SN1,1
′◦] + [S1
′◦◦, . . . , SN1,2
′◦◦]
:
N1,1 + N1,2 = N1
and similarly resolve [S1
′′, . . . , SN2
′′ ]:
[S1
′′, . . . , SN2
′′ ] = [S1
′′◦, . . . , SN2,1
′′◦] + [S1
′′◦◦, . . . , SN2,2
′′◦◦]
:
N2,1 + N2,2 = N2
(Here ◦indicates that S -measurements always yield b1, ◦◦that they always
yield b2.) The quantity S is dispersionless in each of the four sub-ensembles
[S1
′◦, . . . , SN1,1
′◦], [S1
′◦◦, . . . , SN1,2
′◦◦], [S1
′′◦, . . . , SN2,1
′′◦], [S1
′′◦◦, . . . , SN2,2
′′◦◦]
(the measured values are invariably b1, b2, b1, b2 respectively).
But although
the ﬁrst two ensembles are parts of [S1
′, . . . , SN1
′ ], and the latter two parts of
[S1
′′, . . . , SN2
′′ ] in which R did not have dispersion, R can now have dispersion
in each one of them, because the S measurements have changed the individual
systems of which they are comprised.
In short, we do not get ahead: each
step destroys the results of the preceding one,162 and no further repetition of
successive measurements can bring order to this confusion. In an atom we are at
the boundary of the physical world, where each measurement is an interference
of the same order of magnitude as the quantity being measured, and therefore
aﬀects it profoundly. It is evident that the uncertainty relations are at the root
of these diﬃculties.
Therefore we have no method which would make it always possible to
resolve further the dispersing ensembles (without a change of their elements) or
to penetrate to those imagined homogeneous ensembles which no longer have
dispersion—the ensembles we are accustomed to supposing are composed of
individual particles, all identical, and all determined causally. Nevertheless, we
might attempt to maintain the ﬁction that every dispersing ensemble can be
divided into two (or more) parts, diﬀerent from each other and from it, without a
change of its elements. The imagined division would be such that superposition
of the resolved ensembles would again produce the original ensemble. As we see,
the attempt to interpret causality as an equality deﬁnition led to a question of
fact which can and must be answered, and which might conceivably be answered
negatively. This is the question: Is it really possible to represent each ensemble
[S1, . . . , SN], in which there is a quantity R with dispersion, as a superposition
of two (or more) ensembles diﬀerent from one another and from it? (More than
two—say, n = 3, 4, . . .—can be reduced to two if we consider the ﬁrst and the
superposition of the n −1 others.)
If [S1, . . . , SN] were the mixture (sum) of [S1
′, . . . , SP
′ ] and [S1
′′, . . . , SQ
′′ ]
the probability function wR(a) (see Note 157) for each quantity R could be
162 One should consider, for example, what happens if we substitute q and p
(cartesian coordinate and momentum, which are not simultaneously measurable
because of the uncertainty relations) for R and S. If q has very small dispersion
in an ensemble, then the p-measurement with accuracy (i.e., dispersion) ϵ sets
up a q dispersion of at least 1
2ℏ/ϵ (see III.4): everything is ruined.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
expressed with the aid of the probability functions wR
′ (a) and wR
′′ (a) of the two
sub-ensembles:
M1
wR(a) = αwR
′ (a) + βwR
′′ (a)
:
α > 0, β > 0, α + β = 1
Here α = P/N, β = Q/N (N = P + Q) are independent of R. Fundamentally,
this is a purely mathematical problem: If in an ensemble with probability
functions wR(a) there exist quantities R with dispersion (which is a property
of wR(a), as indicated in Note 160), are there two other ensembles, with
respective probability functions wR
′ (a) and wR
′′ (a), such that—for all R—M1
holds? The question can also be formulated in a somewhat diﬀerent way if we
characterize an ensemble not by the probability functions wR(a) of quantities
R but by their expectation values
Exp(R) =
, +∞
−∞
adwR(a)
Then our question is the following: An ensemble is dispersion-free if in it, for
each R,
Exp
*
[R −Exp(R)]2+
= Exp(R2) −[Exp(R)]2
is equal to zero (see again Note 160); i.e.,
Dis1
Exp(R2) = [Exp(R)]2
If this is not the case, is it always possible to ﬁnd two sub-ensembles (with
expectation values denoted Exp′(R), Exp′′(R):Exp(R) ̸≡Exp′(R) ̸≡Exp′′(R))
such that
M2
Exp(R) = αExp′(R) + β Exp′′(R)
:
α > 0, β > 0, α + β = 1
always holds (α, β independent of R)? (It should be noted that for a single
quantity R the number Exp(R) is not a substitute for the function wR(a), but
on the other hand: knowledge of all Exp(R) is equivalent to knowledge of all
wR(a). Indeed, if fa(x) is deﬁned
fa(x) =
- 1
for
x ⩽a
for
x > a
then wR(a) = Exp
*
fa(R)
+
.)
To handle this question mathematically it is preferable not to consider
the [S1, . . . , SN] themselves, but rather the corresponding Exp(R).
To each
such ensemble there belongs one such function which is deﬁned for all physical
quantities R in S, which takes on real numbers as values and which, conversely,
completely characterizes the ensemble in all its statistical properties (see the
discussion above on the relation between Exp(R) and wR(a)). Of course, it
remains to discover what properties an R-function must possess if it is to be
the Exp(R) of a suitable ensemble. But as soon as we have done this we will


1. Fundamental Basis of the Statistical Theory
be in position to make these deﬁnitions:
α. An R-function, if it is an Exp(R), is said to be dispersion-free
if it satisﬁes the condition Dis1.
β. An R-function, if it is an Exp(R), is said to be homogeneous or
pure if, for it, M2 implies
Exp(R) ≡Exp′(R) ≡Exp′′(R)
It is conceptually plausible that each dispersion-freeExp(R)-function should
be pure, and we shall soon prove it. But we are interested at the moment in
the converse question: Is each pure Exp(R)-function dispersion-free?
It is evident that each Exp(R)-function must possess the following
properties:
A. If the quantity R is identically 1 (i.e., if the “directions for
measurement” are: no measurement is necessary, because R always
has the value 1), then Exp(R) = 1.
B. For each R and each real number a, Exp(aR) = aExp(R).163
C. If the quantity R is by nature non-negative (if, for example, it
is the square of another quantity S163) then also Exp(R) ⩾0.
D. If the quantities R, S, . . . are simultaneously measurable then
Exp(R + S + · · ·) = Exp(R) + Exp(S) + · · ·
(If R, S, . . . are not simultaneously measurable then their sum is
undeﬁned: see above.)
All this follows immediately from the deﬁnitions of the quantities under
consideration (i.e., from the directions for their measurement) and from the
deﬁnition of expectation value as the arithmetic mean of all the results of
measurement in a suﬃciently large statistical ensemble. Regarding D, it should
be noted that its correctness depends upon this theorem on probability: The
expectation value of a sum is always the sum of the expectation values,
independently of whether or not dependencies exist between these (in contrast,
for example, to the probability of the product). That D embodies this basic
fact only as it pertains to simultaneously measurable R, S, . . . is natural, since
otherwise R + S + · · · is meaningless.
But quantum mechanics exploits still another operation, which goes beyond
the one just discussed: namely, the addition of two arbitrary quantities which
are not necessarily simultaneously observable. This operation depends upon the
163 aR, S2, R+S+· · · mean that we may substitute R, S, . . . in the functions
f(x) = ax, f(x) = x2, f(x, y, . . .) = x + y + · · · respectively, in the sense of the
deﬁnitions given above.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
fact that for two Hermitian operators R, S the sum R+ S is also Hermitian, even
if R and S do not commute (while, for example, the product RS is Hermitian
only if the two operators commute: see II.5). In each state φ the expectation
values behave additively: (Rφ, φ)+(Sφ, φ) = ((R+ S)φ, φ) (see III.1). The same
holds for several summands.
We now incorporate this fact into our general
set-up (which at this point is not yet specialized to quantum mechanics):
E. If R, S, . . . are arbitrary quantities then there is an additional
quantity R+S+· · · (which does not depend upon the choice of the
Exp(R)-function) such that
Exp(R + S + · · ·) = Exp(R) + Exp(S) + · · ·
If R, S, . . . are simultaneously measurable then R + S + · · · must be
the ordinary sum (by D). But in general the sum is characterized only in
an implicit way by E, which provides no indication of how one is to proceed
from the measurement instructions for the quantities R, S, . . . to measurement
instructions for the quantity called R + S + · · ·.164
In addition,
it must be remarked that we shall admit not only
Exp(R)-functions representing expectation values, but also functions which
correspond to relative values; i.e., , we allow the normalization condition A to
be dropped. If Exp(1) (which is ⩾0 by C) is ﬁnite and ̸= 0 this is unimportant,
since for Exp(R)/Exp(1) everything is as before. But Exp(1) = ∞is an entirely
diﬀerent matter, and it is to address this issue that we undertake the following
extension of the material developed above. The point at issue is best illustrated
by a simple example.
The fact is that there are cases in which it is better
to operate with relative probabilities than with true probabilities—speciﬁcally
164 For example, the energy operator
H0 = (Px)2 + (Py)2 + (Pz)2
2m
+ V (Qx, Qy, Qz)
of a (charged) particle moving in a potential ﬁeld V (x, y, z) (see, for example,
III.6) is a sum of two non-commuting operators
R = (Px)2 + (Py)2 + (Pz)2
2m
,
S = V (Qx, Qy, Qz)
While the measurement of the quantity R belonging to R is a momentum
measurement, and that of the S belonging to S is a coordinate measurement,
we measure the R + S belonging to H0 = R + S in an entirely diﬀerent way: for
example, by measurement of the frequencies of the spectral lines, since these
lines determine (by reason of the Bohr frequency relation) the energy levels;
i.e., the R + S values. Nevertheless, under all circumstances,
Exp(R + S) = Exp(R) + Exp(S)


1. Fundamental Basis of the Statistical Theory
the cases with an inﬁnite total relative probability (Exp(1) is the total
probability). The following is such an example: Let the observed system be
a particle in one dimension, and let its statistical distribution be of such a kind
that it lies with equal probability everywhere in the inﬁnite interval. Then each
ﬁnite interval has probability zero, but the equal probability of all places is not
expressed in this way, but rather by the fact that two ﬁnite intervals have as their
probability ratio the quotient of their lengths. Since 0/0 has no meaning, this
can be expressed only if we introduce their lengths as relative probabilities. The
total relative probability will then of course be ∞.
Upon consideration of the foregoing, we arrive at the following adjusted
form of our conditions (A′ corresponds to C, B′ corresponds to B, D, E):
A′. If the quantity R is by nature non-negative (if, for example, it
is the square of another quantity S) then also Exp(R) ⩾0.
B′. If R, S, . . . are arbitrary quantities and a, b, . . . real numbers,
then
Exp(aR + b S + · · ·) = aExp(R) + bExp(S) + · · ·
We emphasize:
1.
So far as concerns the construction of relative probabilities,
Exp(R) and c Exp(R) (here c is any non-negative constant) are
not essentially diﬀerent from each other.
2. Exp(R) ≡0 (for all R) supplies no information, and therefore
this function is excluded.
3. Absolute—i.e., correctly normalized expectation values—exist if
Exp(1) = 1. Exp(1) is in any case non-negative (by A′), and if it is
ﬁnite then 1 (with c = 1/Exp(1)) leads to the correct normalization.
The case Exp(R) = 0, as we will show, leads back again to 2, and is
therefore eliminated.
For Exp(R) = ∞, however, an essentially
non-normalized (i.e., relative) statistic exists.
We must still return to our deﬁnitions α, β. By 1, M2 can be replaced by
the following simpler condition
M3
Exp(R) = Exp′(R) + Exp′′(R)
And in the case of Dis1 it is to be observed that the calculation there presupposes
Exp(R) = 1. For Exp(R) = ∞the dispersion-free condition cannot be deﬁned,
since it means Exp((R −ρ)2) = 0, where ρ is the absolute expectation value
of R; i.e., Exp(R)/Exp(1), which in this case becomes ∞/∞and is therefore
meaningless.165 Therefore α, β are rephrased as follows:
165 For dispersion-free ensembles there is,
however,
no reason for not
introducing the correct expectation values.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
α′. An R-function which is an Exp(R) is said to be dispersion-free
if Exp(R) ̸= 0 and is ﬁnite, so that we can assume Exp(R) = 1 by 1.
Then Dis1 is characteristic.
β ′. An R-function which is an Exp(R) is said to be homogeneous
or pure if for it M3 has
Exp′(R) = c′ Exp(R),
Exp′′(R) = c′′ Exp(R)
as a consequence (here c′, c′′ are constants with c′ + c′′ = 1 and—
because of A′ and 1, 2 —also c′ > 0, c′′ > 0).
By reason of A′, B′ and α ′, β ′ we are now in position to make a decision
on the question of causality, as soon as we know the physical quantities in S as
well as the functional relationships between them. In the following section this
will be carried out for the relations of quantum mechanics.
As a conclusion to this section, two remarks should be added.
First: one which concerns the case Exp(1) = 0. It follows from B′ that
Exp(c) = 0. Therefore if a quantity R is always ⩾c′ but ⩽c′′ then (by A′)
Exp(c′′ −R) ⩾0, Exp(R −c′ ) ⩾0 and hence (by B′)
Exp(c′) ⩽Exp(R) ⩽Exp(c′′)
i.e., Exp(R) = 0. Now let R be arbitrary and f1(x), f2(x), . . . a sequence of
bounded functions with
f1(x) + f2(x) + · · · = 1
(An example:
f1(x) = sin x
x ,
fn(x) = sin nx
nx
−sin(n −1)x
(n −1)x
with n = 2, 3, . . ..) Then Exp(fn(R)) = 0 for n = 1, 2, . . . , and therefore (by B′)
we also have Exp(R) = 0. Consequently, Exp(1) = 0 is excluded by 2, according
to the proposition stated previously.
Second: it is remarkable that, by Dis1,
Exp(R2) = [Exp(R)]2
is characteristic for the dispersion-free case, although in this case
Dis2
Exp(f(R)) = f(Exp(R))
must hold for each function f(x), since Exp(R) is simply the value of R, and
Exp(f(R)) the value of f(R). Dis1 is a special case of Dis 2: f(x) = x2, but how
is it that this suﬃces? The answer is the following: If Dis 2 holds for f(x) = x2
it holds of itself for all f(x). One would even be able to replace x2 by any other
continuous and convex function of x (i.e., one for which f( x+y
2 ) < 1
2[f(x)+f(y)]
for all x ̸= y). We do not enter into the proof.


2. Proof of the Statistical Formulas
2. PROOF OF THE STATISTICAL FORMULAS
There corresponds to every physical quantity of a quantum mechanical
system a unique hypermaximal Hermitian operator, as we know (see, for
example, the discussion in III.5), and it is convenient to assume that this
correspondence is one-to-one; i.e., that actually every hypermaximal operator
corresponds to a physical quantity. (We made occasional use of this presumption
in III.3). Granted the validity of that assumption, the following rules are valid
(see F, L in III.5, as well as the discussion at the end of IV.1):
I. If the quantity R has the operator R then the quantity f(R) has
the operator f(R).
II. If the quantities R, S, . . . have the operators R, S, . . . then the
quantity R+S+· · · has the operator R+ S+· · ·. (The simultaneous
measurability of R, S, . . . is not assumed: see previous discussion
of this point.)
A′, B′, α ′, β ′, I and II provide the mathematical basis of our analysis.
Let φ1, φ2, . . . be a complete orthonormal basis. We look—instead of to
operators R themselves—to their matrix elements aµν = (Rφµ, φν) with respect
to that basis. We deﬁne Hermitian operators U(n), V(mn), W(mn) in terms of
their matrix elements:
e(n)
µν =
- 1
for
µ = ν = n
otherwise
f (mn)
µν
=
. 1
for
µ = m, ν = n
for
µ = n , ν = m
otherwise
g(mn)
µν
=
. +i
for
µ = m, ν = n
−i
for
µ = n , ν = m
otherwise
which entail
U(n) = P[φn]
V(mn) = P/ φm+φn
√
0 −P/ φm−φn
√
W(mn) = P/ φm+iφn
√
0 −P/ φm−iφn
√
The corresponding quantities will be denoted U(n), W(mn), U(mn). Evidently
(because anm = ¯amn)
aµν =
#
n
anne(n)
µν +
#
Re(amn)f (mn)
µν
+
#
Im(amn)g(mn)
µν
m,n
m<n
m,n
m<n
Therefore
R =
#
n
ann U (n) +
#
Re(amn)V(mn) +
#
Im(amn)W (mn)
m,n
m<n
m,n
m<n


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
and because of II, B′
Exp(R) =
#
n
ann Exp(U (n)) +
#
Re(amn)Exp(V(mn))
m,n
m<n
+
#
Im(amn)Exp(W (mn))
m,n
m<n
Therefore if we set
µnn = Exp(U (n))
µmn = 1
2Exp(V (mn)) + i 1
2Exp(W (mn))
µnm = 1
2Exp(V (mn)) −i 1
2Exp(W (mn))
:
m < n
we obtain
Exp(R) =
#
m,n
µnmamn
Since µmn = ¯µnm we can deﬁne a Hermitian operator U by (Uφm, φn) = µmn,166
and the right side of the preceding equation becomes Tr(UR) (see II.11). We are
166 That is,
Uφm =
#
n
µmnφn
where the ﬁniteness of !
n |µmn|2 is of course necessary. This can be established
in the following way: If !
n |xn|2 = 1 then R = P[φ] has the matrix ¯xµxν for
φ = !
n xnφ, and its R has the expectation value !
m,n µnm¯xmxn. Because of
P[φ] = P2
[φ],
I −P[φ] = (I −P[φ])2
this is ⩾0 and ⩽Exp(1), therefore ⩾0 and ⩽1 at least for normalized Exp(R).
If xN+1 = xN+2 = · · · = 0, this means that the N-dimensional Hermitian form
N
#
m,n=1
µnm¯xmxn
has values ⩾0 but ⩽1 for !N
n=1 |xn|2 = 1; i.e., that the eigenvalues of the
matrix µρσ (ρ, σ = 1, 2, . . . , N) are ⩾0 but ⩽1. Therefore the length of the
vector
ym =
N
#
n=1
µmnxn
is always ⩽that of the vector xm. For
xm =
- 1
for
m = ¯m
otherwise


2. Proof of the Statistical Formulas
led thus to the formula
Tr
Exp(R) = Tr(UR)
U is a Hermitian operator167 independent of R, and is therefore determined by
the ensemble itself.
With regard to II, Tr satisﬁes B′ for every choice of U: therefore we have
only to determine what limitation A′ imposes upon U.
If ∥φ∥= 1 but is otherwise arbitrary, then R2 = R for the quantity R
belonging to P[φ] because of P2
[φ] = P[φ] and I. Therefore, by A′, Exp(R) ⩾0.
Consequently Tr(UP[φ]) = (Uφ, φ) ⩾0. If f is arbitrary then, for f ̸= 0, φ can
be written f/∥f∥, giving (Uφ, φ) = (Uf, f)/∥f∥2. Hence (Uf, f) ⩾0; for f = 0
this holds automatically. Consequently U is deﬁnite. But the deﬁniteness of U,
which thus follows from A′, is also suﬃcient for the validity of A′.
Indeed, A′ asserts that each Exp(S 2) ⩾0 and no more.
Because if R
admits only of non-negative values then for f(x) = |x| one has f(R) = R.
And since (g(x))2 = f(x) identically for g(x) =
(
|x| one has (g(R))2 = f(R),
R = S2, S = g(R).168 Hence we must prove only this: If S is the operator
belonging to S then Tr(US2) ⩾0. Now S2 is deﬁnite ((S2f, f) = (Sf, Sf) ⩾0).
Therefore if we write A, B in place of U, S2 the problem reduces to proof of the
following theorem: If A, B are Hermitian and deﬁnite then Tr(AB) ⩾0. But we
we have ym = µm ¯m and therefore
N
#
m=1
|xm|2 ⩾
N
#
m=1
|ym|2,
1 ⩾
N
#
m=1
|µm ¯m|2
Since this holds for each N, !
n |µ ¯mn|2 ⩽1.
167 The whole argument is rigorous only if all φ1, φ2, . . . belong to the domain
of R. Now for each R one can ﬁnd such a complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . .
(see II.11), but if R does not have meaning everywhere then this set depends
upon R. Actually, therefore, for each complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . we
have a U dependent upon this set, such that Exp(R) = Tr(UR) need be valid
only for those R to whose domain the φ1, φ2, . . . belong.
However, all these U are equal to one another. Because if U′ and U ′′ are
two such then the above formula holds for both, provided that R has meaning
everywhere, for in that case Tr(U′R) = Tr(U′′R).
For R = P[φ] therefore
(U′φ, φ) = (U′′φ, φ), ((U′−U′′)φ, φ) = 0. Since this holds for all φ with ∥φ∥= 1,
and therefore for all elements of the Hilbert space, U′ −U′′ = O, and therefore
U′ = U′′.
168 We cannot substitute S =
√
R directly (i.e., S = h(R), h(x) = √x )
because we only consider real-valued functions deﬁned for all real x, and √x is
not such a thing, since it is imaginary for negative x.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
have proved this in II.11 by use of a general theorem on deﬁnite operators (see
Note 114).169
Thus have we determined the functions Exp(R) completely;
they
correspond to the deﬁnite Hermitian operator U, and the connection is given by
Tr. We shall call U the statistical operator of the ensemble under consideration.
The points 1, 2, 3 in IV.1 are now easy to discuss. These are the results:
1. From the standpoint of relative probabilities and expectation
values, U and cU (c any positive constant) are not essentially
diﬀerent from each other.
2. U = O supplies no information, and is therefore to be excluded.
3. Absolute (which is to say: correctly normalized) probabilities
and expectation values are obtained if TrU = 1. So long as TrU is
ﬁnite we can normalize by multiplication with c = 1/TrU, according
to 1.
(Because of the deﬁniteness of U, TrU ⩾0.
But actually
TrU > 0, since it follows from TrU = 0 that U = O, as was shown
at the end of IV.1 in the general case; in our case this also follows
from II.11; this is the case excluded by 2.) It is only when TrU is
inﬁnite that relative probabilities and expectation values become
essential.
Finally we must investigate α,β from IV.1; i.e., we must identify the
dispersion-free and homogeneous ensembles among the U.
First we consider the dispersion-free ensembles. For them we are obliged
to assume that U is correctly normalized (see IV.1) and that it is invariably true
that Exp(R2) = [Exp(R)]2; i.e., Tr(UR2) = [Tr(UR)]2. For R = P[φ] one has
169 It is also possible to give a simple direct proof. Let φ1, φ2, . . . be a complete
orthonormal set, aµν = (Aφµ, φν), bµν = (Bφµ, φν), Tr(AB) = !
µ,ν aµνbνµ.
The trace Tr(AB) is ⩾0 if !N
µ,ν=1 aµνbνµ ⩾0. If f = !N
µ=1 xµφµ then
(Af, f) = !N
µ,ν=1 aµνxµ¯xν ⩾0,
(Bf, f) = !N
µ,ν=1 bµνxµ¯xν ⩾0
and therefore the ﬁnite matrices aµν, bµν (µ, ν = 1, 2, . . . , N) are also deﬁnite.
Now both the deﬁniteness and the value of !N
µ,ν=1 aµνbνµ are orthogonally
invariant in N-dimensional space; since bµν is Hermitian it can (in N-space) be
brought to diagonal form by an orthogonal transformation. We may therefore
assume it to be diagonal in the ﬁrst place; i.e., bµν = 0 for µ ̸= ν. Then
!N
µ,ν=1 aµνbνµ = !N
µ=1 aµµbµµ
Because of the deﬁniteness of both matrices aµµ ⩾0 and bµµ ⩾0 (we set
xν =
"
for
ν = µ
for
ν ̸= µ ) and this implies that the above sum is ⩾0.


2. Proof of the Statistical Formulas
R2 = R = P[φ],
Tr(UP[φ]) = (Uφ, φ)
and
therefore
(Uφ, φ) = (Uφ, φ)2,
so
(Uφ, φ) = 0 or (Uφ, φ) = 1. If ∥φ′∥= ∥φ′′∥= 1 then we can vary φ continuously
so that it begins at φ′, ends at φ′′, and at all intermediate points satisﬁes
∥φ∥= 1.170
Clearly, (Uφ, φ) also varies continuously, and—since it can be
only 0 or 1—it is constant. Therefore (Uφ′, φ′) = (Uφ′′, φ′′). Consequently,
(Uφ, φ) is either always 0 or always 1, from which we obtain U = O or U = I,
respectively. U = O is excluded by 2, while U = I cannot be normalized:
Tr(I) = dimension of the space = ∞
So (as we can also see directly) U = I is not dispersion-free. Consequently there
can exist no dispersion-free ensembles.
Let us now look to the homogeneous (or pure) case. By β and Tr, U is
homogeneous if from
U = V + W
(here V and W are, like U, Hermitian and deﬁnite) it follows that V = c′U and
W = c′′U.171 We assert that this property holds for U = P[φ] (∥φ∥= 1) and
only for these.
First, let U have the property mentioned.
Because U ̸= O there is an
f0 with Uf0 ̸= 0; therefore f0 ̸= 0 and consequently (Uf0, f0) > 0 (see II.5,
theorem 19).
We introduce Hermitian operators V, W by describing their
deﬁning action:
Vf = (f, Uf0)
(Uf0, f0) · Uf0,
Wf = Uf −Vf
Then
(Vf, f) = |(f, Uf0)|2
(Uf0, f0) ⩾0
(Wf, f) = (Uf, f)(Uf0, f0) −|(f, Uf0)|2
(Uf0, f0)
⩾0
170 This is clear for φ′ = φ′′ so let us suppose that φ′ ̸= φ′′. “Orthogonalization”
of φ′, φ′′ leads to a φ⊥which is orthogonal to φ′ and such that φ′′ can be
developed as a linear combination of φ′, φ⊥:
φ′′ = aφ′ + bφ⊥,
∥φ′′∥2 = |a|2 + |b|2 = 1
Let |a| = cos θ, |b| = sin θ. Then a = eiα cos θ, b = eiβ sin θ and if we now
deﬁne
a(x) = eixα cos(xθ),
b(x) = eixβ sin(xθ),
φ(x) = a(x)φ′ + b(x)φ⊥
we
have
|a(x)|2 + |b(x)|2 = 1,
∥φ(x)∥= 1
and
observe
that
φ(x)
varies
continuously from φ′ (at x = 0) to φ′′ (at x = 1).
171 Actually, because of 2, we should require that V ̸= O, W ̸= O. The cases
V = O or W = O are, however, included with c′ = 0, c′′ = 1 or c′ = 1, c′′ = 0
respectively.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
(see again II.5, theorem 19); i.e., V, W are deﬁnite, and furthermore U = V+W.
Therefore V = c′U and, because Vf0 = Uf0 ̸= 0, c′ = 1; i.e., U = V. If we now
set
φ =
∥Uf0∥· Uf0
(which entails ∥φ∥= 1) and
c =
∥Uf0∥2
(Uf0, f0)
(which entails c > 0) we obtain Uf = Vf = c(f, φ)φ = cP[φ]f, which (by 1)
gives U = cP[φ] : U is essentially P[φ].
Conversely, let it be assumed that U = cP[φ] with ∥φ∥= 1. If U = V + W
and V, W are deﬁnite then it follows from Uf = 0 that
0 ⩽(Vf, f) ⩽(Vf, f) + (Wf, f) = (Uf, f) = 0
whence (Vf, f) = 0 and therefore that Vf = 0 (see above). But Uf = cP[φ]f = 0
follows from and implies (f, φ) = 0 which—as we have just seen—implies also
Vf = 0. Therefore for each g, (f, Vg) = (Vf, g) = 0. That is: everything which
is orthogonal to φ is orthogonal also to Vg, and consequently Vg = cg ·φ (where
cg is a number dependent upon g). But of this general fact we will use only the
case g = φ; i.e., Vφ = c′φ. Each f has the form (f, φ) · φ + f⊥, where f⊥is
orthogonal to φ. Therefore
Vf = (f, φ) · Vφ + Vf⊥= (f, φ) · c′φ = c′P[φ]f = c′Uf
Consequently V = c′U, W = U −V = (1 −c′)U, and the proof is complete.
So homogeneous ensembles correspond to cases of the type U = P[φ] with
∥φ∥= 1, and for such ensembles Tr gives back the formula E2 of III.1:
E2
Exp(R) = Tr(P[φ]R) = (Rφ, φ)
It should be observed that Exp(1) = Tr(P[φ]) = 1 (because P[φ] belongs to
the one-dimensional space [φ], or by E2); i.e., the present form of U is correctly
normalized. Finally, we inquire into when P[φ] and P[ψ] have the same statistics;
i.e., when P[φ] = cP[ψ] (c a positive constant: see 1). From Tr(P[φ]) = Tr(P[ψ]) = 1
we have c = 1 whence P[φ] = P[ψ]. So the spaces [φ] and [ψ] are identical, and
therefore φ = aψ. It follows from ∥φ∥= ∥ψ∥= 1 that the constant a has
|a| = 1. This is also clearly suﬃcient.
Assembling these results, we can say: There are no ensembles which are
free from dispersion. There are homogeneous ensembles, and these correspond
to U = P[φ], ∥φ∥= 1 and only to these. For these U, Tr goes over into E2,
the normalization is correct and U does not change if φ is replaced by aφ
(a constant with |a| = 1), but every other change of φ changes U in an essential
way (see 1). The homogeneous ensembles therefore correspond to the states of
quantum mechanics as these were characterized earlier: the φ of Hilbert space,


2. Proof of the Statistical Formulas
with ∥φ∥= 1, in which a constant factor of absolute value 1 is unimportant
(see, for example, II.2), and the statistical assertions are made by E2.172
We have arrived at all these results from the purely qualitative conditions
A′, B′, α ′, β ′, I and II.
Hence, within the limits deﬁned by our conditions, the decision is made,
and it is against causality, because all ensembles—even homogeneous ensembles
—have dispersion.
Still be discussed is the question of “hidden parameters,” brought up
in III.2; i.e., the question as to whether the dispersions of the homogeneous
ensembles characterized by the wave functions φ (i.e., by E2) may be due to the
circumstance that these are not the real states, but only mixtures of several
states, and that to describe the actual state additional data—besides the data
supplied by the wave function φ—is necessary (these would be the “hidden
parameters”), and that all that data together would determine everything
causally; i.e., would lead to dispersion-free ensembles.
The statistics of the
homogeneous ensemble (U = P[φ], ∥φ∥= 1) would then have resulted from
averaging over all the actual states of which it is composed; i.e., by averaging
over the values of the “hidden parameters” which are involved in those states.
But this is impossible for two reasons: First, because then the homogeneous
ensemble in question could be represented as a mixture of two diﬀerent
ensembles,173 contrary to its deﬁnition.
Second, because the dispersion-free
ensembles, which would have to correspond to the “actual” states (i.e., which
consist only of systems in their own “actual” states) do not exist. It should
be noted that we need not go any further into the mechanism of the “hidden
parameters,” since we now know that the established results of quantum
mechanics can never be re-derived with their help.
In fact, we have even
established that it is impossible for the same physical quantities to exist with
the same functional connections (i.e., for I and II to hold) if other variables
(i.e., “hidden parameters”) exist in addition to the wave functions.
Nor would it help if there existed other, as yet undiscovered, physical
172 The deductions given in the last two sections, which lead to the concept of
the homogeneous ensemble, were given by the author, G¨ott. Nachr. 1927. The
existence of homogeneous ensembles and their relation to general ensembles
was discovered independently by H. Weyl, Z. Phys. 47 (1927) and the author
(reference cited above). A special case of the more general ensembles (namely,
for two coupled systems: see the discussion in VI.2) was produced by L. Landau,
Z. Physik 45, (1927).
173 If the “hidden parameters”—the totality of which we shall denote by π
—take on only discrete values π1, π2, . . . , πn (n > 1) we obtain two ensembles,
whose superposition is the original one, by assuming the systems with π = π1
are in one, and the systems with π ̸= π1 in the other. If π varies continuously
over a region Π, then let Π′ be a sub-region of Π; the ﬁrst sub-ensemble would
then contain systems with π from Π′, and the other those systems whose π does
not belong to Π′.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
quantities in addition to those represented by the operators in quantum
mechanics because the relations assumed by quantum mechanics (i.e., I and
II) would have to fail already for the by-now-known quantities—those that
we discussed above.
It is therefore not, as is often assumed, a question of
the reinterpretation of quantum mechanics—the present system of quantum
mechanics would have to be objectively false for a description other than the
statistical description of elementary processes to be possible.
The following circumstance is also worthy of mention. The indeterminacy
relations have at ﬁrst glance a certain similarity to the basic postulate of
relativity theory. There it is maintained that it is impossible in principle to
determine the simultaneity of two events occurring at points a distance r apart
more precisely than within a time interval of magnitude r/c (c is the velocity of
light), while the indeterminacy relations assert that it is impossible in principle
to give the position of a material point in phase space more precisely than with a
region of volume ( 1
2ℏ)3.174 Nevertheless there exists a fundamental diﬀerence.
Relativity theory denies the possibility of an objective, precise measurement
of distant simultaneity.
But in spite of this, with the introduction into the
world of a Galilean reference frame it does become possible to construct a
simultaneity deﬁnition that is in reasonable accord with our normal concepts
on this subject. An objective meaning will not be attributed to such a deﬁnition
of distant simultaneity only because such coordinate systems can be chosen in
an inﬁnite number of diﬀerent ways, so that inﬁnitely many distant simultaneity
deﬁnitions can be obtained, all of which are equally good. So the impossibility of
measurement hinges in this instance on the existence of an inﬁnite multiplicity
of possible theoretical deﬁnitions. It is otherwise in quantum mechanics, where
it is in general not possible to describe the wave function φ by points in phase
space, not even if we introduce new (hypothetical, unobserved) coordinates—
the “hidden parameters”—since this would lead to dispersion-free ensembles.
That is: not only is the measurement impossible, so also is any reasonable
theoretical deﬁnition; i.e., any deﬁnition which, although not susceptible to
experimental proof, lies beyond the reach also of experimental refutation. The
principle of impossibility of measurement thus arises in one case from the fact
that there are an inﬁnite number of ways in which the relevant concepts can
be deﬁned without conﬂicting with experience (or with the general, basic
assumptions of the theory)—while in the other case no way exists at all.
To summarize, the position of causality in modern physics can therefore
be characterized as follows: In the macroscopic case there is no experimental
174 The phase space is 6-dimensional: its six coordinates are the three cartesian
coordinates q1, q2, q3 of the mass particle and the three corresponding momenta
p1, p2, p3. By III.4 we have for the relative dispersions ϵ1, ϵ2, ϵ3, η1, η2, η3
ϵ1η1 ⩾1
2ℏ,
ϵ2η2 ⩾1
2ℏ,
ϵ3η3 ⩾1
2ℏ
i.e., ϵ1ϵ2ϵ3η1η2η3 ⩾( 1
2ℏ)3, which sets a universal limit on the precision with
which position in the phase space of classical mechanics can be known.


2. Proof of the Statistical Formulas
evidence which supports it, and none can be devised because the apparent causal
order of the world at large (i.e., for objects visible to the naked eye) has certainly
no other cause than the “law of large numbers” and is completely independent
of whether the natural laws governing elementary processes are causal or not.175
That macroscopically identical objects exhibit identical behavior has little to
do with causality: they are in fact not equal at all, since the coordinates that
determine the states of their atoms almost never coincide exactly, and the
macroscopic method of observation averages over these coordinates (here they
are the “hidden parameters”). The number of these coordinates is, however,
very large (for one gram of matter, about 1025), and therefore the above-
mentioned averaging process entails an extensive diminution of all dispersions,
according to the well-known laws of the calculus of probability. (Naturally, this
is true only in typical cases; in suitable special cases—such as Brownian motion,
systems in unstable states, among others—this apparent macroscopic causality
fails.) The question of causality could be put to a true test only in the atom,
in the elementary processes themselves, and here everything in the present
state of our knowledge militates against it. The only formal theory existing
at the present time which orders and summarizes our experiences in this area
in a half-way satisfactory manner—i.e., quantum mechanics—is in compelling
logical contradiction with causality. Of course, it would be an exaggeration to
maintain that causality has thereby been done away with: quantum mechanics
has, in its present form, several serious lacunae, and it may even be that
it is false, although this latter possibility is highly unlikely in view of the
theory’s startling capacity in the qualitative explanation of general problems,
and the quantitative success of calculations relating to special problems. In
spite of the fact that quantum mechanics agrees well with experiment, and
that it has opened up for us a qualitatively new side of the world, one can
never say of the theory that it has been proved by experience, but only that
it the best known summarization of experience.
However, mindful of such
precautions, we may still say that there is at present no occasion and no reason
to speak of causality in nature. Because no experiment indicates its presence:
the macroscopic are unsuitable in principle, while the only known theory which
is compatible with our experiences relative to elementary processes—quantum
mechanics—contradicts it.
To be sure, we are dealing with an age-old way of thinking that has been
embraced by all mankind. But that way of thinking does not arise from logical
necessity (else it would not have been possible to build a statistical theory),
and anyone who enters the subject without preconceived notions has no reason
to adhere to that way of thinking. Under such circumstances, is it reasonable
to sacriﬁce a reasonable physical theory for the sake of an unsupported idea?
175 See the extremely lucid discussions of Schr¨odinger on this subject:
Naturwiss. 17 (1929), page 37.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
3. CONCLUSIONS FROM EXPERIMENTS
The last section taught us that the most general statistical ensemble which
is compatible with our qualitative basic assumptions is characterized, according
to Tr, by a deﬁnite operator U. Those particular ensembles which we have called
“homogeneous” were characterized by U = P[φ] (∥φ∥= 1), and since these are
the actual states of the systems S (i.e., not capable of further resolution) we
also call them states (speciﬁcally, U = P[φ] is the state φ).
If U has a pure discrete spectrum, perhaps with eigenvalues w1, w2, . . .
and eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . (which form a complete orthonormal set) then
(see II.8)
U =
!
n
wnP[φn]
Because of the deﬁniteness of U, all wn ⩾0 (indeed Uφn = wφn, therefore
(Uφn, φn) = wn and therefore (Uφn, φn) ⩾0) and "
n wn = "
n(Uφn, φn) = TrU
(see also the beginning of IV.1); that is, "
n wn = 1 if U is correctly normalized.
By the remarks at the beginning of IV.1, U can be interpreted as a superposition
of the states φ1, φ2, . . . with the respective relative weights w1, w2, . . . and if U
is correctly normalized then these are also the absolute weights.
But a correctly normalized U (i.e., one with TrU = 1) is totally continuous
(by II.11; see in particular Note 115), and therefore has a pure discrete spectrum.
The same is true if TrU is ﬁnite. (An inﬁnite TrU can be regarded as a limiting
case which we shall not go into here.) In the really interesting case, therefore,
the observed ensemble can be represented as a superposition of states, which
we have actually chosen to be pair-wise orthogonal. We are led thus to call
general ensembles mixtures (in contrast to the homogeneous ensembles, which
are states).
If all the eigenvalues of U are simple (i.e., if all the w1, w2, . . . are diﬀerent
from each other) then, as we know, the φ1, φ2, . . . are uniquely determined
except for constant factors of absolute value 1.
The corresponding states
(and the P[φ1], P[φ2], . . .) are then uniquely determined. Likewise, the weights
w1, w2, . . . are uniquely determined, except for a permutation of the sequence.
In this case, therefore, we can state uniquely from which (pair-wise orthogonal)
states the mixture U is formed. If U has multiple eigenvalues (“degeneracies”),
however, the situation is quite diﬀerent.
Exactly how the φ1, φ2, . . . can be
chosen was discussed in II.8.
This can be done in inﬁnitely many ways, all
essentially diﬀerent (while the w1, w2, . . . are still uniquely determined). We
must write down those among the w1, w2, . . . which are diﬀerent from one
another and then form the closed linear manifolds Mw′, Mw′′, . . . associated
with each of the distinct weights w ′, w ′′, . . . (thus Mw′ contains all solutions
of Uf = w ′f).
After this we proceed in the following manner: From each
Mw′, Mw′′, . . . choose an arbitrary orthonormal set spanning that manifold:
χ1
′, χ2
′, . . . ; χ1
′′, χ2
′′, . . . ; . . . respectively. The χ1
′, χ2
′, . . . ; χ1
′′, χ2
′′, . . . ; . . . are


3. Conclusions from Experiments
the φ1, φ2, . . . and the corresponding eigenvalues w ′, w ′, . . . ; w ′′, w ′′, . . . ; . . .
are the w1, w2, . . . . When Mw has more than one dimension (i.e., when w is
degenerate) the corresponding χ1, χ2, . . . are no longer determined to within a
constant factor of unit absolute value (χ1, for example, can be any normalized
element of Mw); i.e., the states themselves are also multivalued.
This phenomenon can also be formulated as follows: If the states χ1, χ2, . . .
are pair-wise orthogonal (i.e., the χ1, χ2, . . . form an orthogonal set, which may
be ﬁnite or inﬁnite), and if we mix them in such a way that all get the same
weight (i.e., the relative weights are 1 : 1 : · · ·), then the resulting mixture
depends only upon the closed manifold M which is spanned by the χ1, χ2, . . . .
In fact,
U = P[χ1] + P[χ2] + · · · = PM
If the number of the χ1, χ2, . . . is ﬁnite (say s : χ1, . . . , χs) then this U can be
considered to be a mixture of all the normalized elements of M; i.e., of all the
states in M. These are the states
χ = x1χ1 + x2χ2 + · · · + xsχs
:
|x1|2 + |x2|2 + · · · + |xs|2 = 1
Actually, if we write x1 = u1 + iv1, . . . , xs = us + ivs then
|x1|2 + · · · + |xs|2 = u2
1 + v2
1 + · · · + u2
s + v2
s = 1
describes the (2s−1)-dimensional surface K of a unit sphere in 2s-space, and
for
U′ =
##
· · ·
##
K
P[χ] dΩ
:
dΩdenotes the diﬀerential surface element
we have
(U′f, g) =
##
· · ·
##
K
(P[χ]f, g)dΩ
=
##
· · ·
##
K
(f, χ)(g, χ)dΩ
=
##
· · ·
##
K
$
f, "s
µ=1(uµ + ivµ)χµ
%$
g, "s
ν=1(uν + ivν)χν
%
dΩ
=
##
· · ·
##
K
s
!
µ,ν=1
(f, χµ)(g, χν)(uµ −ivµ)(uν + ivν)dΩ
=
s
!
µ,ν=1
(f, χµ)(g, χν) ·
##
· · ·
##
K
&
(uµuν + vµvν) + i(uµvν −uνvµ)
'
dΩ
All the uµvν and uνvµ-integrals, as well as all uµuν and vµvν-integrals with


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
µ ̸= ν, vanish by symmetry,176 while in the cases µ = ν all of the latter integrals
have value C/2s (C > 0).176 Therefore
(U′f, g) = Cs
s
!
µ=1
(f, χµ)(g, χµ)
= Cs
s
!
µ=1
(P[χµ]f, g) =
()
Cs
s
!
µ=1
P[χµ]
*
f, g
+
Consequently
U′ = Cs
s
!
µ=1
P[χµ] = Cs · U
i.e., U′ and U are not essentially diﬀerent.
These results are of such great signiﬁcance to the nature of quantum
statistics that we shall repeat them:
1.
If a mixture is made up of mutually orthogonal states with
exactly equal weights, then it can no longer be determined what
these states were.
Or—equivalently—we can produce the same
mixture from diﬀerent (mutually orthogonal) components by again
mixing in exactly equal proportions.
2. The mixture so obtained is—if the number of states is ﬁnite—
identical to the mixture of all states which are linear combinations
of these components.
The simplest example of this type is the following: If we mix φ, ψ (orthogonal)
in the proportion 1 : 1 then we obtain the same result as if we were to mix (for
example)
φ + ψ
√
2 ,
φ −ψ
√
in the proportion 1 : 1 or even all xφ + yψ (|x|2 + |y|2 = 1). If we mix two
non-orthogonal φ, ψ (in a proportion possibly diﬀerent from 1 : 1) then we
are still less able to determine the composition of the ﬁnal mixture, since this
176 uµ →−uµ (similarly uν →−uν and vµ →−vµ) is a symmetry operation
of K in which the former integrands change their signs, and their integrals
are therefore equal to zero. On the other hand, uµ ↔vµ and uµ ↔uν are
symmetry operations of K in which the latter integrals are interchanged; their
integrals are therefore equal and hence equal to
2s times their sum:
##
· · ·
##
K
$
u2
1 + v2
1 + · · · + u2
s + v2
s
%
dΩ=
##
· · ·
##
K
dΩ
= surface area of K
which we will agree to call C.


3. Conclusions from Experiments
mixture certainly could have been obtained also by mixing orthogonal states.
We postpone further investigation into the nature of mixtures until the
thermodynamic discussions in V.2 and thereafter.
The formula Tr in IV.2 states how the expectation value of the quantity
R with the operator R is to be calculated in a mixture with the statistical
operator U: it is Tr(UR). The probability therefore that the value a of R lies in
the interval a′< a ⩽a ′′ (a′, a′′ given, a′< a′′) is to be found as in III.1 or III.5:
If the quantity F(R) is formed with the function
F(x) =
) 1
for
a′< x ⩽a′′
otherwise
then its expectation value is the probability mentioned. Now F(R) has (by I in
IV.2) the operator F(R), and if E(λ) is the resolution of the identity belonging
to R, then—as we have calculated more than once—F(R) = E(a′′) −E(a′) and
the desired probability is w(a′, a′′) = TrU[E(a′′) −E(a′)]. Consequently the
probability function which describes the statistics of R is w(a) = TrUE(a) (see
IV.1, Note 175; for states, i.e., for U = P[φ], we again have w(a) = TrP[φ]E(a) =
(E(a)φ, φ)). Naturally these probabilities are only relative if U is not correctly
normalized.
The question as to when the quantity R with operator R, in a mixture
with the statistical operator U, takes on the value λ∗with certainty can be
answered directly with the aid of w(a): for a < λ∗we must require w(a) = 0,
and for a ⩾λ∗we must require w(a) = 1 or—if U is not correctly normalized—
w(a) = Exp(1) = TrU. That is, TrUE(a) = 0 for a < λ∗, TrU[I −E(a)] = 0 for
a ⩾λ∗.177 Now for deﬁnite operators A, B the equation TrAB = 0 has AB = O
as a consequence (see II.11), and therefore
UE(a) =
,
O
for
a < λ∗
U
for
a ⩾λ∗
or, what is equivalent, E(a)U = O or U respectively, since the factors must
commute because of the Hermitian nature of the product. That is, for f = Ug
E(a)f =
,
for
a < λ∗
f
for
a ⩾λ∗
and by the discussion presented in II.8 this means that Rf =λ∗f; i.e., RUg =λ∗U
identically in g. Consequently, the ultimate condition is RU = λ∗U. Or, if we
177 If TrU is inﬁnite the latter formulas, obtained by subtractions, may appear
doubtful. They can, however, be established as follows: That R has the value λ∗
means that w(a′, a′′) = 0; i.e., TrU[E(a′′) −E(a′)] = 0 for a′′< λ∗or a′ ⩾λ∗.
Since this trace is always ⩾0, and since it is monotone increasing with a′′
as well as monotone decreasing with a′ it suﬃces to consider the
lim
−∞←a′′ for
a′′< λ∗and the lim
a′→+∞for a′ ⩾λ∗. That is, TrU[I −E(a′)] = 0 for a′ ⩾λ∗and
TrUE(a′′) = 0 for a′′< λ∗.


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
denote by M the closed linear manifold formed by all solutions h of Rh = λ∗h:
Uf always lies in M.
This same result could also have been obtained from the vanishing of the
dispersion; i.e., the (possibly relative) expectation value of (R −λ∗)2.
In III.3 we answered the following questions (let R, S, . . . be physical
quantities, R, S, . . . their respective operators):
1.
When is R measurable with absolute precision?
answer:
Whenever R has only a discrete spectrum.
2.
When are R, S measurable simultaneously with absolute
precision? answer: Whenever R, S have only a discrete spectra
and commute.
3. When are several quantities R, S, . . . measurable simultaneously
with absolute precision? answer: Whenever R, S, . . . have only a
discrete spectra and all commute.
4. When are several quantities R, S, . . . measurable simultaneously
with arbitrary precision? answer: Whenever R, S, . . . all commute.
In the latter case we used the following principle, abstracted from the result
of the Compton-Simons experiment:
M. If the physical quantity R is measured twice in prompt succession
in a system S then we get the same value each time. This is the case
even though R may have non-zero dispersion in the original state of
S, and even though the R-measurement can change the state of S.
We have discussed the physical meaning of M in detail in III.3. Further
assumptions drawn upon in constructing answers to 1– 4 were: the statistical
formula E2 of III.3 for states; the assumption F of III.3, according to which F(R)
has the operator F(R) if R has the operator R; the assumption according to
which R+S has the operator R+S if the (simultaneously measurable) quantities
R, S have the respective operators R, S.
Since these three assumptions are again at our disposal (the ﬁrst follows
from the formula Tr in IV.2, the other two correspond to I, II in IV.2) and M must
also be assumed to correct—because we have perceived that it is indispensable
to the conceptual structure of quantum mechanics—the proofs given in III.3 for
1– 4 also hold here. The answers given are therefore again correct.
In III.5 we investigated physical quantities which take only two values:
0, 1. Those quantities stood in unique correspondence with the “properties” E.
Indeed, if E is given then the quantity could be deﬁned like this: it is measured
by distinguishing whether the property E is present or not, and its value is 1 or
0 respectively. Conversely, if the quantity was given, then E was this property:
the quantity in question has the value 1 (i.e., not 0). From F in III.5 (i.e., from
I in IV.2) it followed that the corresponding operators E are actually and
invariably projections. The probability therefore that E be present was equal to


3. Conclusions from Experiments
the expectation value of the quantity deﬁned above.
In
III.5 it was
calculated only for states (i.e., for cases of the type U = P[φ], ∥φ∥= 1), but we
can determine it in general from Tr: it is Tr UE. (Relative! The absolute value
is obtained only if U is correctly normalized; i.e., if Tr U = 1.)
Since we have made certain of 1– 4, the statements derived from them—
namely α– ζ in III.5 —are likewise valid. Of course, it should be observed that
in the former case α gave information only for states, but here we state the
extension that pertains to all mixtures:
α ′) The property E is present or not present in the mixture with
the statistical operator U with the respective probabilities
Tr(UE)
and
Tr(U(I −E]))
(Relative probabilities! These are absolute only if U is correctly
normalized: Tr U = 1.)
If several quantities R1, . . . , Rℓare investigated, and if they correspond
respectively to operators R1, . . . , Rℓthat have the respective resolutions of the
identity E1(λ), . . . , Eℓ(λ); if, moreover, ℓintervals
I1
:
λ′
1 < λ ⩽λ′′
...
Iℓ
:
λ′
ℓ< λ ⩽λ′′
ℓ
are given and if
E1(I1) = E1(λ′′
1) −E1(λ′
1)
...
Eℓ(Iℓ) = Eℓ(λ′′
ℓ) −Eℓ(λ′
ℓ)
then the projections E1(I1), E2(I2), . . . , Eℓ(Iℓ) belong (see ζ) to the respective
properties
“R1 lies in I1”
“R2 lies in I2”
...
“Rℓlies in Iℓ”
The commutativity of the E1(I1), E2(I2), . . . , Eℓ(Iℓ) is then characteristic
(see γ) for these to be simultaneously decidable, and (see ϵ) the projection
for their simultaneous validity is E = E1(I1)E2(I2) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ). The probability of
that composite event is given therefore by Tr(UE) (see α ′).
Let us now follow the converse path: Let us assume that we do not know
the state of the system S, but that we have made certain measurements on S
and know the results. In reality, it always happens this way, because we can
learn something about the state of S only from the results of measurements.
The states are only a theoretical construction: only the results of measurements


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
are actually available, and the problem of physics is to discover relations
between the results of past and future measurements. To be sure, this is always
accomplished through the introduction of the auxiliary concept of “state,” but
the physical theory must tell us on the one hand how from past measurements
to make inferences about the present state and, on the other hand, how to go
from the present state to the predicted results of future measurements. Up
to now, we have dealt only with the latter question, and we must now apply
ourselves to the former.
If anterior measurements do not suﬃce to determine the present state
uniquely we may still be able to infer from those measurements—under certain
circumstances—with what probabilities particular states are present.
(This
holds in causal theories—for example, in classical mechanics—as well as in
quantum mechanics.) The proper problem is then this: Given certain results of
measurements, ﬁnd a mixture whose statistics are the same as those which we
would expect for a system S of which we know only that these measurements
were carried out on it and that they had the results mentioned. Of course, we
must actually be more precise: we must indicate what it means to say that
“we know only this, and no more” about S, and how this can lead to a set of
statistics.
In any case, the connection with statistics must be the following: If for
many systems S1
′, . . . , SM
′ (replicas of S) these measurements give the results
mentioned, then this ensemble [S1
′, . . . , SM
′ ] coincides in all its statistical
properties with the results of the measurements.
That the results of the
measurements are the same for all S1
′, . . . , SM
′ can be attributed—by M—to
the circumstance that originally a large ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] was given in
which the measurements were carried out, and then those elements for which
the desired results occurred were collected into a new ensemble: this is then
[S1
′, . . . , SM
′ ]. Of course, everything depends upon how [S1, . . . , SN] was chosen.
This initial ensemble gives, so to speak, the a priori probabilities of the
individual states of the system S. The whole state of aﬀairs is well known
from general probability theory: to be able to proceed from the results of
measurements to the states; i.e., from eﬀect to cause—i.e., to be able to
calculate a posteriori probabilities—we must know the a priori probabilities.
In general these can be chosen in many diﬀerent ways, and accordingly our
problem cannot be solved uniquely. However, we shall see that under the special
conditions presented by quantum mechanics, a certain determination of the
initial ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] (i.e., of the a priori probabilities) is particularly
satisfactory.
The results are quite diﬀerent if the results of measurements at our disposal
suﬃce for us to determine the state of S completely. Then the answer to every
question must be unique. We will soon see how this circumstance makes itself
felt.
Finally, let us mention the following: Instead of saying that several results
of measurements (on S) are known we can say that S was examined in relation
to a certain property E and its presence was ascertained. From α– ζ we know


3. Conclusions from Experiments
how these things are related: if, for example, the results of (simultaneous)
measurements are available, according to which the values of the quantities
R1, . . . , Rℓlie in the respective intervals I1, . . . , Iℓ, then (with the symbols used
earlier) the projection operator belonging to the proposition (or property) E is
E = E1(I1)E2(I2) · · · Eℓ(Iℓ).
The information about S always amounts, therefore, to the presence of
a certain property E which is formally characterized by presentation of the
associated projection operator E. Let us investigate the statistical operator U
of the equivalent ensemble [S1
′, . . . , SM
′ ], as well as the statistical operator U0 of
the general initial ensemble [S1, . . . , SN]. What are the mathematical relations
among E, U and U0?
Because of M, E is certainly present in [S1
′, . . . , SM
′ ]; i.e., the quantity
corresponding to E has the value 1.
This means that EU = U, as we saw
at the beginning of this section; i.e., Uf always lies in M, where M is the set
of all f with Ef = f; i.e., the closed linear manifold belonging to E.
Instead of EU = U we can also write UE = U or U(I −E) = O; i.e., Ug = 0
for all g = (I−E)f; i.e., for all g of the closed linear manifold belonging to I−E;
i.e., for all g of R −M. Therefore Uf is equal to 0 for all f of R −M. And for
the f of M, Uf also lies in M. Nothing further can be said about U in this way.
This (essentially, i.e., except for a constant factor) determines U if and
only if M is 0- or 1-dimensional. In fact, for M = [0] we have U = O, which
is impossible (by IV.2, Remark 1). For M = [φ] (φ ̸= 0, so we may assume
∥φ∥= 1) we have Uφ = cφ, and therefore for all f of M (since these are
all equal to aφ) Uf = cf. Hence, in general, Uf = UEf = cEf which give
U = cE = cP[φ]. Since c > 0 (because U is deﬁnite and ̸= O) we have essentially
U = E = P[φ]. For dim(M) ⩾2 we can choose two orthonormal φ, ψ from
M. Then P[φ], P[ψ] are two essentially diﬀerent U which satisfy our condition.
Therefore E = O is impossible; for E = P[φ] (∥φ∥= 1) we have U = E = P[φ];
otherwise U is many-valued.
The fact that E = O is incompatible with ﬁnding any U at all would
be disastrous if it were possible for an S to possess such a property E. This,
however, is excluded by η : such an E can never exist; its probability is always 0.
A one-dimensional M—i.e., an E = P[φ] (∥φ∥= 1)—determines U uniquely
and ﬁxes the state φ. Therefore this is the kind of measurement which—if it
turns out in the aﬃrmative—determines the state of S completely, and in fact
determines it to be φ.178 All other measurements are incomplete, and do not
determine a unique state.
178 That is, if E is present, the state is φ. If it is not present, then “not E”
is present: I −E = I −P[φ] and R −M = R −[φ] appear in place of E = P[φ],
M = [φ]. This does not determine U uniquely. (E corresponds to the question
“Is the state φ?”) A measurement for which each process determines the state
uniquely is a measurement of a quantity R whose operator R has a discrete
spectrum with simple eigenvalues (III.3). After the measurement, one of the
states φ1, φ2, . . . (the eigenfunctions of R) is present; i.e., the state of S is in


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
In the general case we proceed as follows: Let the quantity corresponding
to the proposition E also be called E. Then U obtains like this: E is measured
on the whole ensemble ([S1, . . . , SN]) of U0, and all the elements for which the
measurement gave 1 are collected, forming the ensemble ([S1
′, . . . , SM
′ ]) of U.
The measurement of E might be eﬀected in many diﬀerent ways: for example,
another quantity R, of which E is a known function, E = f(R), could be
measured.
To be more speciﬁc, let φ1, φ2, . . . be an orthonormal set which
spans M, and let ψ1, ψ2, . . . be a corresponding set for R −M. Then
φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . .
spans
M + (R −M) = R
i.e., it is complete.
Let λ1, λ2, . . . , µ1, µ2, . . . be distinct real numbers, and
deﬁne the operator R by
R
("
n xnφn + "
m ymφm
+
=
!
n
λnxnφn +
!
m
µmymψm
R clearly has the pure discrete spectrum λ1, λ2, . . . , µ1, µ2, . . . with respective
eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . ., and all the eigenvalues are simple.
Let
F(x) be any function with
F(λn) = 1 (all λn)
:
F(µm) = 0 (all µm)
Then F(R) has eigenvalue 1 for φ1, φ2, . . . and therefore for each f of M,
while F(R) has eigenvalue 0 for ψ1, ψ2, . . . and therefore for each f of R −M.
Consequently E = F(R). If R belongs to R then E = F(R). The E-measurement
can therefore be interpreted as an R-measurement.
In this case we can calculate how U0, U are related.
According to the
R-measurement each system is in one of the states φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . ., the
particular one depending on which of the values λ1, λ2, . . . , µ1, µ2, . . . was found.
The respective probabilities are
Tr(U0P[φ1]) = (U0φ1, φ1),
Tr(U0P[φ2]) = (U0φ2, φ2),
. . .
Tr(U0P[ψ1]) = (U0ψ1, ψ1),
Tr(U0P[ψ2]) = (U0ψ2, ψ2),
. . .
(see the observations of III.3, the validity of which we have established). That
is, these fractions of the U0-ensemble go over into the ensembles
P[φ1], P[φ2], . . . , P[ψ1], P[ψ2] . . .
Since E = I corresponds to R = λ1, λ2, . . . the U ensemble arises by inclusion of
that ﬁrst group. Consequently
U =
!
n
(U0φn, φn)P[φn]
general changed by the measurement.
By analogy, the E-measurement also
changes the state, since afterwards, for a positive result, U = P[φ], while for
a negative result U(I −P[φ]) = U, UP[φ] = O (i.e., Uφ = 0), while previously
neither was necessarily the case. This quantum mechanical “determination” of
the state thus alters it, as was to be expected.


3. Conclusions from Experiments
Now each P[φn] commutes with R,179 and therefore it must also commute
with U. That is, if U does not commute with each R arising in the manner
described above then certain measurement processes (namely, those depending
on the corresponding R) are eliminated from U0 in the production of U. Then
we know more about U than that it was created by an E-measurement. But
since U should represent just this state of our knowledge, we try to adhere to
the following condition: If there exists a U for which no measurement process
of E need be excluded, then we shall make use of such a U. Therefore, let us
investigate whether there are such U, and what they are!
As we saw, U must commute with all R produced in the manner described.
From this it follows that RUφn = URφ = U(λnφn) = λnUφn; i.e., Uφn is an
eigenfunction of R with eigenvalue λn: therefore Uφn = anφn. In particular,
Uφ1 = a1φ1. If any φ of M is given, then we can so choose φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . .
that φ1 = φ, and therefore each such φ is an eigenfunction of U. All these φ must
belong to the same eigenvalue; indeed, if φ, ψ belong to diﬀerent eigenvalues
then they must be orthogonal.
Observe next that
√
2(φ + ψ) is also an
eigenfunction, and since
(φ + ψ
√
2 , φ
+
= (φ, φ)
√
=
√
(φ + ψ
√
2 , ψ
+
= (ψ, ψ)
√
=
√
it is orthogonal to neither φ nor ψ, and hence belongs to the same eigenvalue as
both φ and ψ, which is impossible since these belong to diﬀerent eigenvalues.
Consequently, Uφ = aφ with constant a. The restriction ∥φ∥= 1, to which this
result is subject, can clearly be omitted. So for all f of M, Uf = af. Therefore
UEg = aEg for all g, by which we have UE = aE. But U = UE so U = aE.
U, E are both deﬁnite and ̸= O. Therefore a > 0, and so we can set U = E
without changing it essentially.
Conversely, this U fulﬁlls the requirement for each R; i.e., for each set
φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . . if U0 is appropriately chosen. For U0 = I
!
n
(U0φn, φn)P[φn] =
!
n
(φn, φn)P[φn]
=
!
n
P[φn] = PM = E = U
Hence E = U is established in the sense of the outline sketched above. Also, U0
can be determined if we assume it to be universal; i.e., independent of E and R.
179 Because, for example,
RP[φn]f = R
$
(f, φn) · φn
%
= (f, φn) · Rφn = λn(f, φn) · φn
P[φn]Rf = (Rf, φn) · φn = (f, Rφn) · φn = λn(f, φn) · φn


Chapter IV: Deductive Development of the Theory
U0 = I then yields the desired result, and only this. Indeed
(Uφm, φm) = (Eφm, φm) = (φm, φm) = 1
(Uφm, φm) =
!
n
(U0φn, φn)(P[φn]φm, φm)
=
!
n
(U0φn, φn)|(φn, φm)|2 = (U0φm, φm)
Therefore (U0φm, φm) = 1. Since each φ of M with ∥φ∥= 1 can be made a φ1 we
have (U0φ, φ) = 1, and from this it follows for all f of M that (U0f, f) = (f, f).
Since M is arbitrary, this holds for all f in general, and consequently U0 = I.
Consider two properties E and F, not necessarily simultaneously decidable.
What is the probability that a system S in which the property E has just been
found to hold will, in an immediately following observation, also be found to
possess the property F ? By the above, this probability is Tr(EF) = "(EF).
(E, F are the operators of E, F; the expression on the left arises from U = E,
that on the right from E2 = E, F2 = F, by II.11). Moreover, these probabilities
are relative, so that E should be considered ﬁxed and F variable; if
Tr(E) = "(E) = dim M
is ﬁnite we can normalize by dividing by dim M.
In place of the properties E, F we can consider physical quantities: Let
R1, . . . , Rj and S1, . . . , Sk be two separate sets of simultaneously measurable
quantities (they need not, however, form such a set when taken conjointly); let
their respective operators be R1, . . . , Rj, S1, . . . , Sk and their resolutions of the
identity be E1(λ), . . . , Ej(λ), F1(λ), . . . , Fk(λ). Let intervals
I1
:
λ′
1 < λ ⩽λ′′
...
Ij
:
λ′
j < λ ⩽λ′′
j
J1
:
µ′
1 < λ ⩽µ′′
...
Jk
:
µ′
k < λ ⩽µ′′
k
and let
E1(I1) = E1(λ′′
1) −E1(λ′
1)
...
Ej(Ij) = Ej(λ′′
j ) −Ej(λ′
j)
F1(J1) = F1(µ′′
1) −F1(µ′
1)
...
Fk(Jk) = Fk(µ′′
k) −Fk(µ′
k)


3. Conclusions from Experiments
Suppose now that R1, . . . , Rj were measured on S and their values found to lie
in I1, . . . , Ij, respectively. The question is: What is the probability that prompt
measurement will show the values of S1, . . . , Sk to lie in J1, . . . , Jk, respectively?
Clearly, we must set E = E1(I1) · · · Ej(Ij) and F = F1(J1) · · · Fk(Jk). Then the
desired probability is (see ϵ, ζ)
Tr
!
E1(I1) · · · Ej(Ij) · F1(J1) · · · Fk(Jk)
"
=
# !
E1(I1) · · · Ej(Ij) · F1(J1) · · · Fk(Jk)
"
In conclusion, let us refer once again to the meaning of the general initial
ensemble U0 = I. We obtained U from it by resolving it, in the case of the
R measurement, into two parts.
If we had not so resolved it, i.e., had we
measured R on all its elements and joined all these together again to form
an ensemble, then we would again have obtained U0 = I. This can easily be
calculated directly, or can be proved by choosing E = I. Then the µ1, µ2, . . .
and the ψ1, ψ2, . . . are absent, and the λ1, λ2, . . . and φ1, φ2, . . . for a complete
set. Therefore, although the measurement of R changes the individual elements
under certain circumstances, all these changes must exactly compensate each
other, because the entire ensemble does not change. Furthermore, this property
is characteristic for U0 = I.
Because if for all complete orthonormal sets
φ1, φ2, . . .
U0 =
∞
#
n=1
(U0φn, φn)P[φn]
then U0 commutes with P[φ1] since it does with each P[φn].
That is, U0
commutes with each P[φ], ∥φ∥= 1. Therefore
U0φ = U0P[φ]φ = P[φ]U0φ = (U0φ, φ) · φ
i.e., φ is an eigenfunction of U0. From this it follows that U0 = I, exactly as
U = E was obtained earlier from the corresponding relation (with M, E in place
of R, I).
In U0 = I, therefore, all possible states are in the highest possible degree of
equilibrium, which no measuring process can alter.
For each complete
orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . .
U0 = I =
∞
#
n=1
P[φn]
From this we learn that U0 = I corresponds in the older quantum theory to
the ordinary thermodynamic assumption of the “a priori equal probability
of all simple quantum orbits.”
It will also play an important role in our
thermodynamic considerations, to which the next sections are devoted.


 


CHAPTER V
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
1. MEASUREMENT AND REVERSIBILITY
What happens to a mixture with the statistical operator U if a quantity R with
operator R is measured in it? This operator must be thought of as measuring
R in each element of the ensemble and collecting the thus-processed elements
together into a new ensemble. We will answer the question—to the extent that
it admits of an unambiguous answer.
First, let R have a pure discrete simple spectrum, let φ1, φ2, . . . be the
complete orthonormal set of eigenfunctions and λ1, λ2, . . . the corresponding
eigenvalues (by assumption all diﬀerent from each other).
After the
measurement, the state of aﬀairs is the following: In a fraction (Uφn, φn) of
their original ensemble, R has the value λn (n = 1, 2, . . .). This fraction then
forms an ensemble (sub-ensemble) in which R has the value λn with certainty
(by M in IV.3); it is therefore in the state φn with the (correctly normalized)
statistical operator P[φn]. Upon collecting these sub-ensembles, therefore, we
obtain a mixture with the statistical operator
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
(Uφn, φn)P[φn]
Second, let us abandon the assumption that the pure discrete spectrum
of R is simple; i.e., let us admit the possibility that among the λn there are
coincidences. Then the R-measurement process is not uniquely deﬁned (the
same was the case, for example, with E in IV.3).
Indeed, let µ1, µ2, . . . be
distinct real numbers, and S the operator corresponding to the φ1, φ2, . . . and
µ1, µ2, . . . Let S be the corresponding quantity. If F(x) is a function with
F(µn) = λn
:
n = 1, 2, . . .
then F(S) = R and therefore F(S) = R. Hence the S-measurement can also
be regarded as an R-measurement.
This now changes U into the U′ given


Chapter V: General Considerations
above, and U′ is independent of the (entirely arbitrary) µ1, µ2, . . . but not of
the φ1, φ2, . . . .
But the φ1, φ2, . . . are not uniquely determined, because of
the multiplicities of the eigenvalues of R. In IV.2—following II.8—we indicated
what can be said regarding the φ1, φ2, . . .: Let λ′, λ′′, . . . be the diﬀerent values
assumed by the eigenvalues λ1, λ2, . . . and let Mλ′, Mλ′′, . . . be the sets of the
f which satisfy Rf = λ′f, Rf = λ′′f, . . . respectively. Finally, let
χ1
′, χ2
′, . . . ;
χ1
′′, χ2
′′, . . . ;
. . .
respectively be arbitrary orthonormal sets that span Mλ′, Mλ′′, . . . .
Then
χ1′, χ2′, . . . , χ1′′, χ2′′, . . . , . . . is the most general φ1, φ2, . . . set.
Hence U′
—depending upon the choice of S; depending, that is, upon the actual measuring
arrangement—may be any expression of the form
U′ =
!
n
(Uχn
′ , χn
′ )P[χn
′ ] +
!
n
(Uχn
′′ , χn
′′ )P[χn
′′ ] + · · ·
This construction is, however, unambiguous only in special cases.
We determine this special case. Each individual term must be unambiguous.
That is, for each eigenvalue λ, if Mλ is the set of f with Rf = λf, the sum
!
n
(Uχn, χn)P[χn]
must have the same value for every choice of the orthogonal set χ1, χ2, . . .
spanning the manifold Mλ. If we call this sum V then verbatim repetition of
the observations in IV.3 (in which U0, U, M are to be replaced now by U, V, Mλ)
shows that we must have V = cλPM (cλ a positive constant), and that this is
equivalent to the validity of (Uf, f) = cλ(f, f) for all f of Mλ. Since these f
are the same as PMλg for all g, we require
(UPMλg, PMλg) = cλ(PMλg, PMλg)
:
all g
i.e.,
(PMλUPMλg, g) = cλ(PMλg, g)
:
all g
i.e.,
PMλUPMλ = cλPMλ
for all the eigenvalues λ of R.
But if this condition—which clearly imposes
a sharp restriction upon U—is not satisﬁed then diﬀerent arrangements for
measuring R can actually transform U into diﬀerent statistical operators U′.
(Nevertheless, we will succeed in V.4 in making some statements about the result
of a general R-measurement, on a thermodynamic basis.)
Third, let R have no pure discrete spectrum. Then by III.3 (or by IV.3,
criterion I) it is not measurable with absolute precision, and R-measurements
of limited precision (as we discussed in the case referred to) are equivalent to
measurements of quantities with pure discrete spectra.


1. Measurement and Reversibility
Another
type
of
intervention
in
material
systems—in
contrast
to
discontinuous,
non-causal
and
instantaneously
acting
experiments
or
measurements—is
given
by
the
time-dependent
Schr¨odinger
diﬀerential
equation. This describes how the system changes continuously and causally
in the course of time, if its total energy is known. For states φ these equations
are
T1
∂
∂tφt = −i
ℏHφt
where H is the energy operator.
For Ut = P[φt], the statistical operator of the state φt, this means
" ∂
∂tUt
#
f = ∂
∂t
"
Utf
#
= ∂
∂t
"
(f, φt) · φt
#
= (f, ∂
∂tφt) · φt + (f, φt) · ∂
∂tφt
= −(f, i
ℏHφt) · φt −(f, φt) · i
ℏHφt
= i
ℏ
$
(Hf, φt) · φt −(f, φt) · Hφt
%
= i
ℏ
"
UtH −HUt
#
f
which is to say:
T2
∂
∂tUt = i
ℏ
"
UtH −HUt
#
But if Ut refers not to a state but to a mixture of several states—say
P[φ
(1)
t
], P[φ
(2)
t
], . . .
with respective weights
w1, w2, . . .
—the motion of Ut must reﬂect the motion of the individual terms
P[φ
(1)
t
], P[φ
(2)
t
], . . .
By weighted addition of the corresponding instances of T2 we ﬁnd that T2
pertains also to such mixtures. Since all U refer to such mixtures, or limiting
cases of them (for example, each U with ﬁnite TrU refers to such a mixture),
we can claim the general validity of T2.
It is, moreover, the case that in T2 the operator H may depend on t, just
as it may in the Schr¨odinger diﬀerential equation. If H is not t-dependent we
can even give explicit solutions: For T1, as we already know,
T1
′
φt = e−i
ℏtHφ0
and for T2
T2
′
Ut = e−i
ℏtHU0 e+ i
ℏtH
(It is easily veriﬁed that these are solutions, and also that they follow from each
other. It is clear also that there is only one solution for each given value of φ0
or U0: the diﬀerential equations T1 and T2 are of ﬁrst order in t.)


Chapter V: General Considerations
We therefore have two fundamentally diﬀerent types of interventions which
can occur in a system S or in an ensemble [S1, . . . , SN]. We allude here ﬁrst to
the abrupt changes
U −→U′ =
∞
!
n=1
(Uφn, φn)P[φn]
that are brought about by measurement (φ1, φ2, . . . is a complete orthonormal
set), and second to the temporally graded dynamical transformations
U −→Ut = e−i
ℏtHU0 e+ i
ℏtH
that are generated by the energy operator (Hamiltonian) H, here assumed to
be time-independent. If H does depend upon time, we may divide the time
interval under consideration into brief sub-intervals during each of which H is,
in suﬃcient approximation, constant; we apply 2 to these individual intervals,
and construct the ﬁnal result by iteration.
We must now analyze in greater detail these two types of intervention—
their nature, and their relation to one another.
First of all, it is noteworthy that 2 admits (in the manner described above)
of the possibility that H is time-dependent, so that one might expect that
2 would suﬃce to describe interventions caused by measurement: indeed, a
physical intervention can be nothing other than the temporary insertion of a
certain energy coupling into the observed system; i.e., the introduction into
H of a certain time dependency (prescribed by the observer). Why then have
we need—for measurements—of the special process 1? The reason is this: In
a measurement we cannot observe the system S by itself, but must rather
investigate the system S + M in order to obtain (numerically) its interaction
with the measuring apparatus M. The theory of measurement is a statement
concerning S + M, and should describe how the state of S is related to certain
properties of the state of M (namely, the positions of a certain pointer, since
the observer reads these). Moreover, it is rather arbitrary whether one includes
the observer in M, and replaces the relation between the S state and the pointer
positions in M by relations between this state and chemical changes in his eye
or even in his brain (i.e., to that which he has “seen” or “perceived”). We shall
investigate this more precisely in VI.1. In any case, the application of 2 is of
importance only for S + M. Of course, we must show that this gives the same
result for S as does the direct application of 1 to S. If this is proves successful,
then we will have achieved a uniﬁed way of looking at the physical world on a
quantum mechanical basis. We postpone discussion of this question until VI.3.
Second, it has to be noted with regard to 1 that we have repeatedly shown
that a measurement in the sense of 1 must be instantaneous; i.e., must be
carried out in so brief a time that the change of U given by 2 is not noticeable.
(If we wanted to correct this by calculating the changed Ut by 2 we would still
gain nothing because to apply any Ut we must ﬁrst know t—the moment of


1. Measurement and Reversibility
measurement—exactly; i.e., the duration of the measurement must be short.)
But this now is questionable in principle, because it is well known that there
is a quantity which, in classical mechanics, is conjugate to time: the energy.180
Therefore it is to be expected that for the canonically conjugate pair time-energy
there must exist indeterminacy relations similar to those of the conjugate pair
cartesian coordinate-momentum.181 Note that the theory of special relativity
shows that a far-reaching analogy must exist: the three space coordinates and
time form a “four vector” as do the momentum coordinates and energy. Such
an indeterminacy relation would mean that it is not possible to carry out a very
precise measurement of energy in a very short time. In fact, one would expect
the error ϵ of the energy measurement and the duration τ of the measurement
to stand in the relation
ϵτ ∼h
A physical discussion, similar to that carried out in III.4 for p, q, actually leads
to this result.181 Without going into details, we can consider the case of a light
quantum. Its energy uncertainty is, because of the Bohr frequency condition, h
times the frequency uncertainty ∆ν: h∆ν. But, as was discussed in Note 137,
∆ν is at best the reciprocal 1/τ of the time duration; i.e., ϵ >∼h/τ. And in
order that the monochromatic nature of the light quantum be established in the
time interval τ the measurement must extend over the entire duration of the
interval. The case of the light quantum is characteristic, since the atomic energy
levels are, as a rule, determined from the frequency of the corresponding spectral
lines. Since energy behaves in such fashion, a relation between the measurement
precision of other quantities R and the duration of the measurement might also
be anticipated.
But how, then, can our assumption that measurements are
instantaneous be justiﬁed?
First of all, we must admit that this objection points to an essential
weakness which is, in fact, the chief weakness of quantum mechanics: the theory
is non-relativistic; it distinguishes time t from the three space coordinates x, y, z
and presupposes an objective simultaneity concept.
In fact,
while all
other quantities (especially those x, y, z—so closely related to t by Lorentz
transformations) are represented by operators, there corresponds to time not an
operator T but an ordinary number-parameter t,
just as in classical
mechanics. Or again: a system consisting of two particles has a wave function
which depends on 2 × 3 = 6 space coordinates but only one time coordinate
t, although from a relativistic standpoint two times would be desirable (more
natural). That measurements cannot in fact be instantaneous but must be of
non-vanishing ﬁnite duration has the status of natural law. That we can ignore
that law may possibly have to do with the non-relativistic character of quantum
mechanics. But if that provides a degree of clariﬁcation, it is not a happy one!
180 Any textbook of classical (Hamiltonian) mechanics gives an account of this
connection.
181 The uncertainty relations for the pair time-energy have been discussed
frequently. See the comprehensive treatment of Heisenberg, Die Physikalischen
Prinzipien der Quantentheorie, II.2.d, Leipzig, 1930.


Chapter V: General Considerations
A more detailed investigation of the problem shows, however, that the
situation is really not so bad as it may at ﬁrst appear. For what we really need
is not that the duration t of the measurement be small, but only that it have
little eﬀect in the calculation of the probabilities (Uφn, φn)—and therefore in
the formation of
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
(Uφn, φn)P[φn]
—whether we proceed from U itself or from
Ut = e−i
ℏtHUe+ i
ℏtH
Because of
(Utφn, φn) =
$
e−i
ℏtHUe+ i
ℏtHφn, φn
%
=
$
Ue
i
ℏtHφn, e
i
ℏtHφn
%
this can be accomplished by so adjusting H (by introduction of an appropriate
perturbation term) that
e
i
ℏtHφn = φn to within a constant factor of absolute value 1
That is, the state φn should be essentially constant with respect to 2; i.e., a
stationary state. Or equivalently, Hφn must be equal to a real constant times
φn; i.e., φn must be an eigenfunction of H. At ﬁrst glance, the possibility of such
an adjustment of H—one which renders the eigenfunctions of R stationary, and
therefore eigenfunctions also of H (which is to bring about the commutativity
of R and H)—may seem implausible. But this is not really the case, and it will
emerge that typical experimental arrangements aim to have exactly this sort of
eﬀect on H.
In point of fact, every experiment culminates in the emission of a light
quantum or of a particle, with a certain energy in a certain direction.
Characteristics of the emitted quantum/particle—its momentum,
or the
coordinates of the point where it (the “pointer”) comes to rest—comprise the
result of the measurement. In the case of light quanta, using the terminology
of III.6, the desired measurement is thus equivalent to a statement as to which
mn = 1 (the rest being 0), i.e., to an enumeration of all m1, m2, . . . values.
For a moving (departing) mass point the corresponding statement refers to the
values of the momentum components Px, Py, Pz, while for a mass point at rest
it refers its (the pointer’s) cartesian coordinates x, y, z; i.e., to the values of
Qx, Qy, Qz. But the measurement is completed only if the light quantum is
“borne away;” i.e., when the light quantum is not in danger of absorption, or
when the mass point can no longer be deﬂected by ambient forces, or caused
to drift away from the point at which it has come to rest, in which case a large
mass is necessary.182 (This latter requirement is made necessary because of the
182 All other details of the measuring arrangement address only the connection
between the quantity of interest R (or of its operator R) and the mn or the
Px, Py, Pz (else Qx, Qy, Qz) mentioned above.
This, of course, is the most
important practical aspect of the measurement techniques.


1. Measurement and Reversibility
uncertainty relations; we want the velocity and its dispersion to be small, but for
the dispersion in position also to be small the dispersion in momentum—mass
times velocity—must be large. Ordinarily, pointers are macroscopic objects;
i.e., enormous.)
Now the energy operator H, so far as concerns the light
quantum, is (see III.6, page 171)
∞
!
n=1
hρn· mn +
∞
!
j,n=1
wn
kj
&√
mn + 1
'
k →j
mn →mn + 1
(
+ √mn
'
k →j
mn →mn −1
()
while for both mass point models H is given by
(Px)2 + (Py)2 + (Px)2
2m
+ V (Qx, Qy, Qz)
Our criteria say: the wn
kj should vanish, or the potential energy V should be
constant, or the mass m should be very large. But this actually produces the
eﬀect that the Px, Py, Pz and the Qx, Qy, Qz (respectively) commute with the
H given above.
In conclusion, it should be mentioned that the making stationary of the
really interesting states (here the φ1, φ2, . . .) plays a role elsewhere too in
theoretical physics. Assumptions concerning the possibility of the interruption
of chemical reactions (i.e., their “poisoning”), which are often unavoidable in
physical-chemical “ideal experiments,” are of this nature.183
The two interventions 1 and 2 are fundamentally diﬀerent from one another.
That both are formally unique—i.e., causal—is unimportant; indeed, since
we are working in terms of the statistical properties of mixtures it is not
surprising that each change, even if it is statistical, eﬀects a causal change of the
probabilities and expectation values. Indeed, it is for precisely this reason that
one introduces statistical ensembles and probabilities! On the other hand, it is
important that 2 does not increase the statistical uncertainty present in U, but
that 1 does. 2 transforms states into states
P[φ] −→P[φt]
with
φt = e−i
ℏtHφ
while 1 can transform states into mixtures.
In this sense, therefore, the
development of a state according to 1 is statistical, while according to 2 it
is causal.
Furthermore, for ﬁxed H and t, 2 is simply a unitary transformation of all U:
Ut = AUA
–1, A = exp{−i
ℏtH} unitary. That is, Uf = g implies Ut(Af) = (Ag),
See, for example, Nernst, Theoretische Chemie, Stuttgart (numerous
editions since 1893), Book IV: Discussion of the thermodynamic proof of the
“law of mass action.”


Chapter V: General Considerations
so that Ut results from U by the unitary transformation A of Hilbert space; i.e.,
by an isomorphism that leaves all of our basic geometric concepts invariant (see
the principles set down in I.4). Therefore U →Ut is reversible: it suﬃces to
replace A by A
–1, and this is possible since A, A
–1 can be regarded as entirely
arbitrary unitary operators—this because of the far-reaching freedom one has in
the selection of H, t. Therefore 2—like classical mechanics—fails to reproduce
one of the most important and striking properties of the real world; namely,
its irreversibility, the fundamental diﬀerence between “future” and “past,” the
directions of time.
On the other hand, 1 is of a fundamentally diﬀerent character:
the
transition
U −→U′ =
∞
!
n=1
(Uφn, φn)P[φn]
is certainly not prima facie reversible. We will soon see that it is in general
irreversible in the sense that it is in general not possible to proceed U ←−U′
by repeated application of the processes 1, 2!
We have reached a point at which it becomes necessary to resort to the
thermodynamic method of analysis, because it alone makes it possible for us to
come to a correct understanding of the diﬀerence between 1 and 2, a distinction
into which reversibility questions obviously enter.
2. THERMODYNAMIC CONSIDERATIONS
We shall investigate the thermodynamics of quantum mechanical ensembles
from two diﬀerent points of view. First, let us assume the validity of both of
the fundamental laws of thermodynamics, i.e., the impossibility of perpetual
motion of the ﬁrst and second kinds (energy law and entropy law),184 and
proceed on this basis to calculation of the entropy of ensembles. In this eﬀort
the normal methods of phenomenological thermodynamics are applied, and
quantum mechanics plays a role only insofar as our thermodynamic observations
relate to objects whose behavior is regulated by the laws of quantum mechanics
(our ensembles, as well as their statistical operators U). But the correctness
of both laws will here be assumed, and not proved. Afterwards we will prove
the validity of these fundamental laws in quantum mechanics. Since the energy
law holds in any case, only the entropy law need be considered. Speciﬁcally, we
will show that the interventions 1, 2 never decrease the entropy, as calculated
by the ﬁrst method. Our decision to proceed in this order may seem somewhat
184 The
phenomenological
system
of
thermodynamics
built
upon
this
foundation can be found in numerous texts; see, for example, Planck Treatise
on Thermodynamics London, 1927. For the following, the statistical aspect of
these laws is of chief importance. This is developed in the following treatises:
Einstein, Verh. d. dtsch. physik Ges. 12, (1914); Szilard, Z. Physik 32 (1925).


2. Thermodynamic Considerations
unnatural, but is based on the fact that it is from phenomenological discussion
that we obtain the overall view of the problem that is required for considerations
of the second kind.
We therefore begin with phenomenological considerations which will permit
us to solve a well-known paradox of classical thermodynamics. First we must
emphasize that the unusual character of our “ideal experiments”—i.e., their
practical infeasibility—does not impair their demonstrative power: in the sense
of phenomenological thermodynamics, every conceivable process constitutes
valid evidence, provided only that it does not conﬂict with the two fundamental
laws of thermodynamics.
Our objective is to determine the entropy of an ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] with
the statistical operator U, where U is assumed to be correctly normalized; i.e.,
TrU = 1. In the terminology of classical statistic mechanics we are dealing
with a Gibbs ensemble: i.e., the application of statistics and thermodynamics
will be made not on the (interacting) components of a single, very complicated
mechanical system with many (only imperfectly known) degrees of freedom,185
but on the ensemble of very many (identical) mechanical systems, each of which
may have an arbitrarily large number of degrees of freedom, and each of which is
entirely separated from the others, and does not interact with any of them.186
As a consequence of the complete separation of the systems S1, . . . , SN, and
of the fact that we will apply to them the ordinary enumerative methods of
the calculus of probability, it is evident that the Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac
statistics—which diﬀer from those, and which are applicable to certain
ensembles of indistinguishable particles (namely:
those comprised of light
quanta or of electrons/protons: see III.6, particularly Note 147)—do not enter
into the problem.
The method introduced by Einstein for the thermodynamic treatment
of such ensembles [S1, . . . , SN] is the following:187 Each system S1, . . . , SN is
conﬁned in a box K1, . . . , KN whose walls are impenetrable to all transmission
eﬀects, which is possible for this system because of the lack of interaction.
Furthermore, each box must have a very large mass, so that the possible state
(hence energy and mass) changes of the S1, . . . , SN aﬀect their masses only
slightly. Also, their velocities in the ideal experiments which are to be carried
out
are
to
be
kept
so
small
that
calculations
may
be
performed
185 This is the Maxwell-Boltzmann method of statistical mechanics (see the
review in the article by P. and T. Ehrenfest in Enzykl.d.Math.Wiss., Vol II.4.D,
Leipzig, 1907). In gas theory, for example, the “very complicated system” is
the gas which consists of many (interacting) molecules, and the molecules are
investigated statistically.
186 This is the Gibbs method (see the reference in Note 185).
Here the
individual system is the entire gas, and many replicas of the same system (i.e., of
the same gas) are considered simultaneously, and their properties are described
statistically.
187 See the reference in Note 184. This was further developed by L. Szilard.


Chapter V: General Considerations
non-relativistically.
We imagine these boxes to be enclosed in a very large
box K (the volume V of K is much larger than the sum of the volumes of
the boxes K1, . . . , KN). For simplicity, no force ﬁeld will be present in K (in
particular, it should be free from all gravitational ﬁelds, so that the large
masses of the K1, . . . , KN have no relevant eﬀects either).
We can therefore
regard the K1, . . . , KN (which contain S1, . . . , SN respectively) as the molecules
of a gas which is enclosed in the large container K.
We now bring K into
contact with a very large heat reservoir at temperature T.
The walls of K
then take on this temperature, and its (literal) molecules then assume the
corresponding Brownian motion. Therefore they contribute momentum to the
adjacent K1, . . . , KN, so that these engage in motion and transfer momentum
to the other K1, . . . , KN.
Soon all K1, . . . , KN will be in motion and will be
exchanging momentum. . . at the wall of K with the literal molecules of the wall,
and with each other in the interior of K. The stationary state is ultimately
attained in which the K1, . . . , KN have taken on the velocity distribution which is
in equilibrium with the Brownian motion of the wall molecules (temperature T),
that distribution being the Maxwellian velocity distribution of a gas of
temperature T, the “molecules” of which are the K1, . . . , KN.188 We can now
say:
The [S1, . . . , SN]-gas has taken on the temperature T.
For brevity, we shall call the ensemble [S1, . . . , SN] with statistical operator U
the “U-ensemble,” and the [S1, . . . , SN]-gas the “U-gas.”
The reason that we concern ourselves with such a gas is that we want to
be in position to determine the entropy diﬀerence between a U-ensemble and
a V-ensemble (here U, V are deﬁnite operators with TrU = TrV = 1 and the
corresponding ensembles are denoted [S1, . . . , SN] and [S1′, . . . , SN′ ]).
That
determination requires by deﬁnition a reversible transformation of the former
ensemble into the latter,189 and this is best accomplished with the aid of the
U- and V-gases. That is, we maintain that the entropy diﬀerence between the
U- and V-ensembles is exactly the same as that between the U- and V-gases if
both are observed at the same temperature T but are otherwise arbitrary. If T
is very near 0 then this is obviously the case with arbitrary precision because
the diﬀerence between the U-gas and the V-gas vanishes as T →0 since the
K1, . . . , KN of the former then have no motion of their own, and the presence of
the K1, . . . , KN in K, when they are at rest, is thermodynamically unimportant
188 The kinetic theory of gases, as is well known, describes in this way the
process in which the walls communicate their temperature to the gas enclosed
by them. See the references in Notes 184 and 185.
189 In this transformation, if the heat quantities Q1, . . . , QN are required at
temperatures T1, . . . , TN then the entropy diﬀerence is equal to
Q1
T1
+ Q2
T2
+ · · · + QN
TN
See the reference in Note 184.


2. Thermodynamic Considerations
(likewise for V). Therefore we shall have accomplished our objective if we can
show for a given change of T that the entropy of the U-gas changes just as
much as the entropy of the V-gas. The entropy change of a gas which is heated
from T1 to T2 depends only upon its caloric equation of state, or more precisely:
upon its speciﬁc heat.190 Naturally, the gas must not be assumed to be an ideal
gas if—as in our case—T1 must be chosen near 0.191 On the other hand, it is
certain that both gases (U and V) have the same equation of state and the same
speciﬁc heats because, by kinetic theory, the boxes K1, . . . , KN dominate and
cover completely the systems [S1, . . . , SN] and [S1′, . . . , SN′ ] which are enclosed
within them. In this heating process, therefore, the diﬀerence between U and
V is not noticeable, and the two entropy diﬀerences coincide, as was asserted.
In the following, therefore, we shall compare only the U- and V-gases with each
other, and shall take the temperature T to be so high that these can be regarded
as ideal gases.192 In this way we control its kinetic behavior completely and can
apply ourselves to the real problem: to transform U-gas reversibly into V-gas.
Now, in contrast to the processes contemplated so far, we shall have also to
consider the S1, . . . , SN found in the interiors of the K1, . . . , KN; i.e., we shall
have to “open” the boxes K1, . . . , KN.
Next, we will show that all states U = P[φ] have the same entropy; i.e.,
that the reversible transformation of the U = P[φ] ensemble into the U = P[ψ]
ensemble is accomplished without the absorption or release of heat energy
(mechanical energy must naturally be consumed or produced if the expectation
value of the energy in P[φ] is diﬀerent from that in P[ψ]); see Note 185. In fact,
we will not even have to refer to the gases just considered. This transformation
succeeds even at the zero-temperature; i.e., with the ensembles themselves.
It should be mentioned, furthermore, that as soon as this is proved we will
be able to—and shall—so normalize the entropies of the U-ensembles that all
states have entropy 0.
Moreover, the transformation P[φ] →P[ψ] does not need to be reversible.
Because if it is not so then the entropy diﬀerence must be ⩾the expression given
in Note 189 (see the reference in Note 185), and therefore ⩾0. Permutation of
190 If c(T) is the speciﬁc heat of the gas quantum under discussion, then when
heated from T to T +dT it takes on the quantity of heat c(T)dT. By Note 185,
the entropy diﬀerence is then
* T2
T1
c(T)dT
T
191 For an ideal gas, c(T) is constant, but for very small T this certainly fails.
See, for example, the reference in Note 6.
192 In addition to this, it is required that the volume V of K be large in
comparison with the total volume of the K1, . . . , KN, and furthermore that the
“energy per degree of freedom” κT (κ is Boltzmann’s constant) be large in
comparison with h2/µV
3 (h is Planck’s constant, µ is the mass of the individual
molecule; this quantity has the dimensions of energy). See, for example, Fermi,
Z. Physik 36 (1926).


Chapter V: General Considerations
P[φ], P[ψ] shows that this value must also be ⩽0. Therefore the value = 0.
The simplest way to proceed would be to refer to the time-dependent
Schr¨odinger equation; i.e., to our process 2, in which an energy operator H
and a numerical value of t must be found such that the unitary operator e−i
ℏtH
transforms φ into ψ.
Then, in t seconds, P[φ] would change spontaneously
into P[ψ]. That process is reversible, and entails no mention of heat (see V.1).
We prefer, however, to avoid assumptions concerning the construction of
suitable energy operators H, and instead to exploit only processes of type 1;
i.e., measuring interventions.
The simplest such measurement would be to
measure, in the ensemble P[φ], a quantity R whose operator R has a pure discrete
spectrum with simple eigenvalues λ1, λ2, . . . and in which ψ occurs among the
eigenfunctions ψ1, ψ2, . . . (say ψ1 = ψ). This measurement transforms φ into a
mixture of the states ψ1, ψ2, . . . and therefore ψ1 = ψ will be present along
with the other states ψn.
This procedure is unsuitable, however, because
ψ1 = ψ occurs only with probability |(φ, ψ)|2, while the portion 1 −|(φ, ψ)|2
goes over into other states. In fact, the latter portion becomes the entire result
when φ and ψ are orthogonal. A diﬀerent experiment, however, will achieve
our objective. By repetition of a great number of diﬀerent measurements we
will change P[φ] into an ensemble which diﬀers from P[ψ] by an arbitrarily
small amount.
That all these processes are (or at least can be) irreversible
is unimportant, as discussed above.
We may assume φ and ψ to be orthogonal, since if they were not we could
choose a χ (∥χ∥= 1) orthogonal to both, and proceed ﬁrst φ →χ, then χ →ψ.
Now assign a value to k = 1, 2, . . . and deﬁne
ψ(ν) = cos πν
2k · φ + sin πν
2k · ψ
:
ν = 0, 1, . . . , k
Clearly, ψ(0) = φ, ψ(k) = ψ and ∥ψ(ν)∥= 1. We extend each ψ(ν) to a complete
orthonormal set ψ(ν)
1 , ψ(ν)
2 , . . . with ψ(ν)
= ψ(ν).
Let R(ν) be an operator
with a pure discrete spectrum and distinct eigenvalues—say λ(ν)
1 , λ(ν)
2 , . . . whose
eigenfunctions are the ψ(ν)
1 , ψ(ν)
2 , . . .—and letR(ν)be the corresponding quantity.
Observe ﬁnally that
"
ψ(ν−1), ψ(ν)#
= cos π(ν−1)
2k
cos πν
2k + sin π(ν−1)
2k
sin πν
2k
= cos
" πν
2k −π(ν−1)
2k
#
= cos π
2k
In the ensemble with U(0) = P[ψ(0)] = P[φ] = U, we now
measure R(1) in U(0), producing U(1), then
measure R(2) in U(1), producing U(2), then
...
and ﬁnally measure R(k) in U(k−1), producing U(k)


2. Thermodynamic Considerations
That U(k), for suﬃciently large k, lies arbitrarily close to P[ψ(k)] = P[ψ] can
easily be established: If we measure R(ν) on ψ(ν−1) then the fraction
|(ψ(ν−1), ψ(ν))|2 = (cos π
2k)2
goes over into ψ(ν), and in the successive measurements R(1), R(2), . . . , R(k)
therefore at least a fraction (cos π
2k)2k will go from ψ(0) = φ over ψ(1), . . . , ψ(k−1)
into ψ(k) = ψ.
And since (cos π
2k)2k →1 as k →∞, the ﬁnal result is as
nearly ψ as one may wish, if k is suﬃciently large. The exact proof runs as
follows:
Since
the
process
does
not
change
the
trace,
and
since
TrU(0) = TrP[φ] = 1, we have TrU(1) = TrU(2) = · · · = TrU(k) = 1. On the other
hand,
(U(ν)f, f) =
!
n
$
U(ν−1)ψ(ν)
n , ψ(ν)
n
%$
P[ψ(ν)
n ]f, f
%
=
!
n
$
U(ν−1)ψ(ν)
n , ψ(ν)
n
%
|(ψ(ν)
n , f)|2
so for ν = 1, . . . , k −1 in the case f = ψ(ν+1)
= ψ(ν+1) we have
(U(ν)ψ(ν+1), ψ(ν+1)) =
$
U(ν−1)ψ(ν), ψ(ν)%
|(ψ(ν), ψ(ν+1))|2
+
!
n ⩾2
$
U(ν−1)ψ(ν)
n , ψ(ν)
n
%
|(ψ(ν)
n , ψ(ν+1))|2
⩾
$
U(ν−1)ψ(ν), ψ(ν)%
|(ψ(ν), ψ(ν+1))|2
=
"
cos π
2k
#2 ·
$
U(ν−1)ψ(ν), ψ(ν)%
while in the case ν = k we set f = ψ(k)
= ψ and obtain
(U(k)ψ(k), ψ(k)) =
!
n
$
U(k−1)ψ(k)
n , ψ(k)
n
%
|(ψ(k)
n , ψ(k)
1 )|2
=
$
U(k−1)ψ(k)
1 , ψ(k)
%
= (U(k−1)ψ(k), ψ(k))
When taken together with
(U(0)ψ(1), ψ(1)) =
$
P[ψ(0)]ψ(1), ψ(1)%
= |(ψ(0), ψ(1))| =
"
cos π
2k
#2
these results give
(U(k)ψ, ψ) ⩾
"
cos π
2k
#2k
Since TrU(k) = 1 and
"
cos π
2k
#2k →1 as k →∞, we can apply a result obtained
in II.11 to conclude that U(k) converges to P[ψ]. This completes the argument
and achieves our objective.


Chapter V: General Considerations
The “ideal experiments” of phenomenological thermodynamics frequently
make use of structures called “semi-permeable walls” (or membranes). To what
extent can one make use of those idealized elements when dealing with quantum
mechanical systems?
In phenomenological thermodynamics this theorem holds: If I and II are
two diﬀerent states of the same system S then it is permissible to assume the
existence of a wall which is completely permeable for I but not permeable for
II:193 this is, so to speak, the thermodynamic deﬁnition of “diﬀerence,” and
therefore also of “sameness” (equality) for two systems. How far is such an
assumption permissible in quantum mechanics?
We ﬁrst show that if φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . . is an orthonormal set then there
is a semi-permeable wall which lets the system S in any of the states φ1, φ2, . . .
pass through unhindered, and which reﬂects unchanged systems in any of the
states ψ1, ψ2, . . . . Systems which are on other states may, on the other hand,
be changed by collision with the wall.
The system φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . . can be assumed to be complete, since
otherwise it could be made so by additional χ1, χ2, . . . which one could then
add to the φ1, φ2, . . . .
We now choose an operator R with a pure discrete
spectrum and simple eigenvalues λ1, λ2, . . . , µ1, µ2, . . . whose eigenfunctions are
φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . . respectively. Let us suppose that in fact (for all n) λn < 0
and µn > 0.
Let R be the quantity belonging to R.
We construct many
“windows” in the wall, each of which is deﬁned as follows: each “molecule”
K1, . . . , KN of our gas (we are again considering U-gases at temperature T > 0)
is detained there, opened, and the quantity R measured on the system S1 or S2
or . . . or SN contained within it. Then the box is closed again, and according
to whether the measured value of R is > 0 or < 0, the box, together with
its contents penetrates the window or is reﬂected, with unchanged momentum.
That this contrivance achieves the desired end is clear: it remains only to
discuss what changes it brings about, and how closely it is related to the
so-called “Maxwell demon” of thermodynamics.194
In the ﬁrst place, it must be said that since the measurement (under certain
circumstances)changes the energystate of S,andperhaps the energy expectation
value also, this diﬀerence in mechanical energy must be added or absorbed
by the measurement device (for example, by installing a spring which can be
stretched or compressed, or something similar). Since the measurement device
functions quite automatically, and since only mechanical (not heat!) energies
are transformed, certainly no entropy changes occur—and it is at present only
this which is of interest to us. (If S is in one of the states φ1, φ2, . . . , ψ1, ψ2, . . .
then the R-measurement does not, in general, change S, and no compensating
changes remain in the measurement apparatus.)
193 See, for example, the reference in Note 184.
194 See the reference in Note 185. The reader will ﬁnd a detailed discussion of
the diﬃculties connected with “Maxwell’s demon” in L. Szilard, Z. Physik 53
(1929).


2. Thermodynamic Considerations
The second point is more doubtful. Our arrangement is rather similar to
“Maxwell’s demon”; i.e., to a semi-permeable wall which transmits molecules
coming from the right but reﬂects those coming from the left. If we use such a
wall to bisect a container ﬁlled with a gas, then all the gas is soon on the left
hand side of the wall; i.e., the volume is halved without entropy consumption.
This means an uncompensated entropy increase of the gas, and therefore, by the
second law of thermodynamics, such a wall cannot exist. Our semi-permeable
wall is, however, essentially diﬀerent from this thermodynamically unacceptable
one, because reference is made with it only to the internal properties of the
“molecules” K1, . . . , KN (i.e., the state of the S1 or S2 or . . . or SN enclosed
therein) and not to the exterior (i.e., whether the molecule comes from right or
left, or something similar). And this is a decisive circumstance. A thorough-
going analysis of this question was made possible by the researches of L. Szilard,
which clariﬁed the nature of the semi-permeable wall, “Maxwell’s demon,” and
the general role of the “intervention of an intelligent being in thermodynamical
systems.” We cannot go further into these things here. And need not, since the
reader can ﬁnd a treatment of these topics in the reference cited in Note 194.
The preceding discussion shows, in particular, that two states φ, ψ can
certainly be separated by a semi-permeable wall if they are orthogonal. We now
want to prove the converse: If φ, ψ are not orthogonal then the assumed existence
of such a wall would contradict the second law of thermodynamics. That is,
the necessary and suﬃcient condition for separability by semi-permeable walls
is (φ, ψ) = 0 and not, as in classical theory, φ ̸= ψ (here we write φ, ψ instead of
the I, II used above). This clariﬁes an old paradox of classical thermodynamics,
which has to do with a perplexing discontinuity in the operation of semi-
permeable walls: states that diﬀer however slightly are always 100% separable,
but absolutely identical states are not separable! We now have a continuous
transition: It will be seen that 100% separability is possible only if (φ, ψ) = 0
and that as |(φ, ψ)| increases the situation with regard to separability becomes
progressively worse, until at |(φ, ψ)| = 1 (here ∥φ∥= ∥ψ∥= 1, so |(φ, ψ)| = 1
entails φ = cψ with |c| = 1) the states φ, ψ are identical and separation becomes
impossible.
In order to conduct these considerations we must anticipate the ﬁnal result
of this section: the value of the entropy of the U-ensemble. We will, of course,
not use this result in its derivation.
Let us assume there is a semi-permeable wall separating φ from ψ. We shall
then prove (φ, ψ) = 0. We consider a 1
2(P[φ]+P[ψ])-gas (i.e., a gas containing 1
2N
systems in state φ and 1
2N systems in state ψ; note that Tr 1
2(P[φ] + P[ψ]) = 1)
and choose V (i.e., K) and T so that the gas is ideal. Let K have the cross
section 1 2 3 4 1 shown in figure 3. We insert a semi-permeable wall at one
end aa, and then move it halfway, up to the center bb. The temperature of the
gas is kept constant by contact with a large heat reservoir W of temperature
T at the other end 2 3. In this process, nothing happens to the φ-molecules,
but the ψ-molecules are pushed to the right half of K (between bb and 2 3).
That is, the 1
2(P[φ] +P[ψ])-gas is a 1:1 mixture of P[φ]-gas and P[ψ]-gas. Nothing


Chapter V: General Considerations
a
b
W
a
b
Figure 3: Equal numbers of φ-molecules and ψ-molecules ﬁll the
cavity K, shown 1 2 3 4 in cross section. A semi-permeable wall—
transparent to φ-molecules but opaque to ψ-molecules—is moved
from position aa to position bb, with consequences developed in
the text. W is a heat reservoir at temperature T. The process is
isothermal.
happens to the former, but the latter is isothermally compressed to one half
of its original volume. From the equation of state of an ideal gas it follows
that in this process an amount
2NκT ln 2 of mechanical work is performed
( 1
2N is the number of molecules of P[ψ]-gas, κ is Boltzmann’s constant),195 and
since the energy of the gas is not changed (because the process is isothermal)196
this energy is injected as heat into the reservoir W. The entropy change of the
reservoir is then Q/T = 1
2Nκ ln 2 (see Note 186).
After this process has been completed, half of the original P[φ]-gas
( 1
4N molecules) occupies the space to the left of the bb partition. The space to
the right of the partition is, on the other hand, occupied by the other half of the
P[φ]-gas ( 1
4N molecules) and the entire P[ψ]-gas ( 1
2N molecules); i.e., by 3
4N
molecules of a 1
3P[φ]+ 2
3P[ψ]-gas. Now—by eﬀectively turning oﬀits permeability
and isothermally repositioning the partition—we compress the gas on the left
to volume 1
4V and expand the gas on the right to volume 3
4V . The work done is
195 If an ideal gas consists of n molecules, then its pressure is p = nκT/V . In
compression from volume V1 to V2 therefore mechanical work
Work on gas = −
* V2
V1
p dV = −nκT
* V2
V1
dV
V
= −nκT ln V2
V1
is done on the gas. In the present instance n = 1
2N, V1 = 1
2V , V2 = V .
196 The energy of an ideal gas, as is well known, depends only on its
temperature.


2. Thermodynamic Considerations
again taken from or given to the reservoir W: this amounts to
4NκT ln 2
and −3
4NκT ln 3
2, respectively (see Note 195), so the entropy increase of the
reservoir is (respectively) 1
4Nκ ln 2 and −3
4Nκ ln 3
2. Altogether:
2Nκ ln 2 +
!
4Nκ ln 2 −3
4Nκ ln 3
"
= Nκ 3
4 ln 4
We have at this point a P[φ]-gas and a ( 1
3P[φ] + 2
3P[ψ])-gas of 1
4N and 3
4N
molecules respectively, occupying respective volumes 1
4V and 3
4V . Originally
we had a ( 1
2P[φ] + 1
2P[ψ])-gas of N molecules in volume V . Or, if we choose
to think of it that way, two ( 1
2P[φ] + 1
2P[ψ])-gases of
4N and
4N molecules
respectively, occupying respective volumes 1
4V and 3
4V . The change eﬀected
by the entire process is then this: 1
4N molecules in volume 1
4V changed from a
( 1
2P[φ] + 1
2P[ψ])-gas into a P[φ]-gas, 3
4N molecules in volume 3
4V changed from a
( 1
2P[φ]+ 1
2P[ψ])-gas into a ( 1
3P[φ]+ 2
3P[ψ])-gas, and the entropy of W increased by
Nκ· 3
4 ln 4
3. Since the process was reversible, the total entropy increase must be
zero; i.e., the two gas-entropy changes must exactly compensate for the changed
entropy of W. We must now ﬁnd the entropy changes of the respective gases.
As we shall see, a U-gas of N molecules has entropy −Nκ·Tr(U ln U) if that
of a P[χ]-gas of equal volume and temperature is taken to be zero (see above).
Therefore, if U has a pure discrete spectrum with eigenvalues w1, w2, . . ., we
have
entropy = −Nκ
∞
#
n=1
wn ln wn
(where it is understood that x ln x is to be set equal to 0 at x = 0). As can
easily be calculated, P[φ], ( 1
2P[φ] + 1
2P[ψ]) and ( 1
3P[φ] + 2
3P[ψ]) have respectively
the eigenvalues
{1, 0}
$1 + α
, 1 −α
, 0
%
$3 +
√
1 + 8α2
, 3 −
√
1 + 8α2
, 0
%
where α = |(φ, ψ)| (therefore 0 ⩽α ⩽1) and the multiplicity of 0 is always
inﬁnite but the non-zero eigenvalues are always simple.197 Therefore the entropy
197 We compute the eigenvalues of aP[φ] + bP[ψ]. The requirement is
(aP[φ] + bP[ψ])f = λf
Since the left side is a linear combination of φ, ψ the right side is also, and
therefore f is too if λ ̸= 0. λ = 0 is certainly an inﬁnitely multiple eigenvalue,
since every f orthogonal to φ, ψ belongs to it. It therefore suﬃces to assume
λ ̸= 0 and f = xφ + yψ (we assume φ, ψ to be linearly independent; otherwise
φ = cψ with |c| = 1 and the two states are identical). The above equation
becomes
a(x + y(ψ, φ)) · φ + b(x(φ, ψ) + y) · ψ = λx · φ + λy · ψ


Chapter V: General Considerations
of the gas has increased by
−1
4Nκ{1 ln 1 + 0 ln 0}
−3
4Nκ
$3 +
√
1 + 8α2
ln 3 +
√
1 + 8α2
+ 3 −
√
1 + 8α2
ln 3 −
√
1 + 8α2
%
+
Nκ
$1 + α
ln 1 + α
+ 1 −α
ln 1 −α
%
(where the leading term vanishes).
This should equal 0 when the entropy
increase Nκ 3
4 ln 4
3 of W is added to it. If we divide by 1
4Nκ then we have
−3 +
√
1 + 8α2
ln 3 +
√
1 + 8α2
−3 −
√
1 + 8α2
ln 3 −
√
1 + 8α2
+ 2(1 + α) ln 1 + α
+ 2(1 −α) ln 1 −α
+ 3 ln 4
3 = 0
where again: 0 ⩽α ⩽1.
Now it is easily seen that the expression on the left increases monotonically
as α ranges from 0 to 1;198 in fact the expression grows from 0 to 3 ln 4
3. We
conclude that necessarily α = 0, for if it were otherwise then the process inverse
whence
(a −λ)x + a(φ, ψ)y = 0
b(φ, ψ)x + (b −λ)y = 0
The determinant of these equations must vanish:
&&&&
a −λ
a(φ, ψ)
b(φ, ψ)
b −λ
&&&& = (a −λ)(b −λ) −ab|(φ, ψ)|2 = 0
i.e.,
λ2 −(a + b)λ + ab(1 −α2) = 0
λ = a + b ±
'
(a + b)2 −4ab(1 −α2)
= a + b ±
'
(a −b)2 + 4abα2
Setting {a, b} = {1, 0} or { 1
2, 1
2} or { 1
3, 2
3} we obtain the respective formulae
given in the text.
198 [By computer-assisted graphic display, or by the following argument:] From
(x ln x)′ = ln x + 1 we have
( 1+y
ln 1+y
+ 1−y
ln 1−y
)′ = 1
(
ln 1+y
+ 1
)
−1
(
ln 1−y
+ 1
)
= 1
2 ln 1+y
1−y
so the α-derivative of our expression is
−3 · 1
2 ln 3 +
√
1 + 8α2
3 −
√
1 + 8α2 · 1
8α
√
1 + 8α2 + 4 · 1
2 ln 1 + α
1 −α
= 2
*
ln 1 + α
1 −α −
2α
√
1 + 8α2 ln 3 +
√
1 + 8α2
3 −
√
1 + 8α2
+


2. Thermodynamic Considerations
to that described would be entropy-decreasing, contrary to the second law.
Thus have we proved that it is impossible for a semi-permeable wall to function
in the manner contemplated above except in the case (φ, ψ) = 0.
After these preparations we can proceed to the determination of the entropy
of a U-gas of N molecules at temperature T; i.e., more precisely, the entropy
excess of such a gas with respect to the entropy of a P[φ]-gas under similar
conditions. By our earlier remarks, this is the entropy of a U-ensemble of N
individual systems. Let TrU = 1, as was done above.
The operator U, as we know, has a pure discrete spectrum w1, w2, . . . with
w1 ⩾0, w2 ⩾0, . . . and w1 +w2 +· · · = 1. Let the corresponding eigenfunctions
be φ1, φ2, . . . . Then (see IV.3)
U =
∞
#
n=1
wnP[φn]
Consequently, our gas is composed of a mixture of P[φ1], P[φ2], . . . gases of
w1N, w2N, . . . molecules respectively, all in the volume V . Let T, V be such
that all these gases are ideal, and let K be of rectangular cross section. Now we
will apply reversible interventions (described below: see Figure 4) to separate
the φ1, φ2, . . . molecules from each other. We adjoin to K (2 3 4 5 2) an equally
large box K′ (1 2 5 6 1), and replace the common wall 2 5 by two contiguous
walls. Let one (2 5) of those be ﬁxed and semi-permeable—transparent for φ1
That this is > 0 means that
ln 1 + α
1 −α >
2α
√
1 + 8α2 ln 3 +
√
1 + 8α2
3 −
√
1 + 8α2
i.e.,
2α ln 1 + α
1 −α > 2
3 · 1
2β ln 1 + β
1 −β
where
β =
√
1 + 8α2
We shall prove the stronger inequality that results from replacing 2
3 with 8
9.
Since 1−β2 = 8
9(1−α2) and α < β (which follows from the former since α < 1)
this means that
1 −α2
2α
ln 1 + α
1 −α > 1 −β2
2β
ln 1 + β
1 −β
and this is proved if 1−x2
2x ln 1+x
1−x is shown to be monotonically decreasing on the
interval 0 < x < 1. This last [graphically evident] property follows, however,
from the power series expansion :
1−x2
2x ln 1+x
1−x = (1 −x2)(1 + 1
3x2 + 1
5x4 + · · ·)
= 1 −(1 −1
3)x2 −( 1
3 −1
5)x4 −· · ·


Chapter V: General Considerations
a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d
Figure 4: A (w1, w2, . . .)-weighted mixture of (φ1, φ2, . . .)-gases
is conﬁned initially within box K (2 3 4 5 2).
Box K′ (1 2 5 6
1) has the same shape and volume as K, but is initially empty.
Wall 2 5 is ﬁxed, transparent to φ1, opaque to all else. Wall bb
is movable, but opaque to everything; it moves in synchrony with
wall dd, which is opaque to φ1, transparent to all else.
Moving
bb:dd to aa:cc has the eﬀect of transporting all φ1 molecules from K
to K′ without expenditure of either work or heat, while leaving the
φ1, φ2, . . . molecules as undisturbed residents of K.
but opaque for φ2, φ3, . . . ; let the other (bb) be movable, but ordinary in the
sense that it is absolutely opaque to everything. In addition, we insert another
semi-permeable wall dd—close to 3 4—which is transparent for φ2, φ3, . . . but
opaque for φ1. We now push bb and dd—keeping the distance between them
constant—to aa and cc respectively (i.e., close to 1 6 and 2 5 respectively).
The φ2, φ3, . . . are not aﬀected by this process, but the φ1 are forced to remain
between the moving walls bb and dd. Since the distance between these walls is
kept constant, no work is done (against gas pressure), and no heat is developed.
Finally, we replace the walls 2 5 and cc by a ﬁxed impenetrable (i.e., universally
opaque) wall, and remove aa; in this way the boxes K, K′ are restored to their
initial condition. There is, however, this change: all the φ1 molecules reside
now in K′. We have transferred all these from K to K′ (a box of the same size),
reversibly and without any work being done, without any evolution of heat or
any temperature change.199
Similarly, we “tap oﬀ” the φ2, φ3, . . . molecules into boxes K′′, K′′′, . . . (all of
the same volume) and have ﬁnally w1N molecules of P[φ1]-gas, w2N molecules
of P[φ2]-gas, . . . , all at temperature T. Now we compress these isothermally to
volumes w1V, w2V, . . . respectively, which requires investments of mechanical
work w1NκT ln w1, w2NκT ln w2, . . . and the transfer of those amounts of
199 See, for example, the reference in Note 184 for an instance of this artiﬁce,
which is characteristic of the methods of phenomenological thermodynamics.


3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
energy (as heat) to a reservoir(of temperature T, so that the process is reversible;
the quantities of heat are all less than zero, since the amounts of work done
in compressing the individual gases are the negatives of these values: see Note
191). The entropy increase for this process amounts to
∞
#
n=1
wnNκ ln wn
Finally,
we transform each of the P[φ1], P[φ2], . . . gases into a P[φ]-gas
(reversibly, with φ is some arbitrarily chosen state: see again the discussion
on pages 234–5). We have then only P[φ]-gases of w1N, w2N, . . . molecules in
the respective volumes w1V, w2V, . . . . Since all of these are identical, and of
the same density N/V , we can mix them, and this also is reversible. We have
then (since ,∞
n=1 wn = 1) a P[φ]-gas of N molecules in volume V .
We have at this point completed the desired reversible process. The entropy
has increased by Nκ ,
n wn ln wn and since it must be zero in the ﬁnal state it
was
−Nκ
∞
#
n=1
wn ln wn
in the initial state.
Since U has the eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . with eigenvalues w1, w2, . . . the
operator U lnU has the same eigenfunctions but eigenvalues w1ln w1, w2ln w2, . . .
Consequently
Tr(U ln U) =
∞
#
n=1
wn ln wn
We observe that from 0 ⩽wn ⩽1 it follows that wn ln wn ⩽0, with equality
only for wn = 0 or 1; note also that for wn = 0 we take wn ln wn to be zero, as
follows from the fact that in the preceding discussion the vanishing wn were
not considered at all.
One is led to those same conclusions by continuity
considerations.
So we have determined that the entropy of a U-ensemble, consisting of
N individual systems, is −NκTr(U ln U). The preceding remarks concerning
wn ln wn establish that this is always ⩾0, and = 0 only if all wn are either 0 or 1.
From TrU = ,
n wn = 1 it follows that in such cases only one wn = 1 and all
the others are 0, therefore U = P[φ]. That is, the states have entropy = 0, while
mixtures have entropies > 0.
3. REVERSIBILITY AND EQUILIBRIUM PROBLEMS
We can now prove the irreversibility of the measurement process, as asserted
in V.1. For example, if U is a state then U = P[φ] and in the measurement of a
quantity R whose operator R has the eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . it goes over into
the ensemble
U′ =
∞
#
n=1
(P[φ]φn, φn) · P[φn] =
∞
#
n=1
|(φ, φn)|2 · P[φn]


Chapter V: General Considerations
and if U′ is not a state then an entropy increase has occurred (the entropy of
U was 0, that of U′ is > 0), so that the process is irreversible. If U′ too is to
be a state it must be a P[φ], and since the φ1, φ2, . . . are its eigenfunctions this
means that all |(φ, φn)|2 = 0 except one (that one being 1); i.e., φ is orthogonal
to all φn, n ̸= ¯n.
But then φ = cφ¯n (|c| = 1), so P[φ] = P[φ¯n], U = U′.
Therefore every measurement on a state is irreversible unless the eigenvalue of
the measured quantity (i.e., the value of this quantity in the given state) has
a sharp value, in which case the measurement does not change the state at all.
As we see, the non-causal behavior here is unambiguously related to a certain
concomitant thermodynamic phenomenon.
We shall now discuss in complete generality when the process 1
U −→U′ =
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn) · P[φn]
increases the entropy.
U has entropy −NκTr(U ln U).
If w1, w2, . . . are its eigenvalues and
ψ1, ψ2, . . . its eigenfunctions then this can be written
−Nκ
∞
#
n=1
wn ln wn = −Nκ
∞
#
n=1
(Uψn, ψn) ln(Uψn, ψn)
U′ has eigenvalues (Uφ1, φ1), (Uφ2, φ2), . . . and therefore its entropy is
−Nκ
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn) ln(Uφn, φn)
Consequently, the entropy of U is ⩾
< that of U′ according as
⋆
∞
#
n=1
(Uψn, ψn) ln(Uψn, ψn) ⩽
>
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn) ln(Uφn, φn)
We next show that in ⋆⩾holds in any case; i.e., that the process U →U′
is not entropy-diminishing; this is indeed clear thermodynamically, but it is
important for our subsequent purposes to possess a purely mathematical proof
of this fact. We proceed in such a way that U—and with it the ψ1, ψ2, . . .—are
ﬁxed, while the φ1, φ2, . . . run through all complete orthonormal sets.
On continuity grounds we may limit ourselves to sets φ1, φ2, . . . in which
only a ﬁnite number of φn are diﬀerent from the corresponding ψn. Then, for
example, φn = ψn for n > M. Then the φn, n ⩽M are linear combinations of
the ψn, n ⩽M, and conversely:
φm =
M
#
n=1
xmnψn
:
m = 1, 2, . . . , M


3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
where the M-dimensional matrix {xmn} is obviously unitary. We have
(Uψm, ψm) = wm
and, as can easily be calculated,
(Uφm, φm) =
M
#
n=1
wn|xmn|2
:
m = 1, 2, . . . M
so that it is
M
#
m=1
wm ln wn ⩾
M
#
m=1
* M
#
n=1
wn|xmn|2
+
ln
* M
#
n=1
wn|xmn|2
+
that is to be proved. Since the expression on the right is a continuous function of
the M 2 bounded variables xmn it has a maximum, and also it actually assumes
its maximum value ({xmn} is unitary!). It assumes the value of the expression
on the left when
xmn =
-
for
m = n
for
m ̸= n
We show that matrix X = {xmn} = I is in fact the maximizer of the
expression on the right.
To that end, let X0 = {x0
mn} where x0
mn (m, n = 1, 2, . . . , M) is a set of
values for which the maximum occurs. If we multiply X0 by the unitary matrix
A =






α
β
. . .
−¯β
¯α
. . .
. . .
...
...
...
...
...
. . .






:
|α|2 + |β|2 = 1
we obtain a {xmn
′
} which is unitary, therefore an acceptable xmn-complex. Now
let α =
√
1 −ϵ2, β = θϵ (ϵ real and |θ| = 1). We assume ϵ to be so small that
we need only look to the 1, ϵ, ϵ2 terms and can neglect the ϵ3, ϵ4, . . . terms. Then
α = 1 −1
2ϵ2 and the elements xmn
′
of the new matrix X′ = AX become
x1n
′
≈
(1 −1
2ϵ2)x0
1n + θϵx0
2n
x2n
′
≈−¯θϵx0
1n + (1 −1
2ϵ2)x0
2n
xmn
′
= x0
mn
:
m ⩾3
Therefore
,M
n=1wn|x1n
′ |2 ≈,M
n=1wn|x0
1n|2 + ,M
n=12wnR(¯θx0
1n¯x0
2n) · ϵ
+ ,M
n=1wn(−|x0
1n|2 + |x0
2n|2) · ϵ2
,M
n=1wn|x2n
′ |2 ≈,M
n=1wn|x0
2n|2 −,M
n=12wnR(¯θx0
1n¯x0
2n) · ϵ
−,M
n=1wn(−|x0
1n|2 + |x0
2n|2) · ϵ2
,M
n=1wn|xmn
′
|2 = ,M
n=1wn|x0
mn|2
:
m ⩾3


Chapter V: General Considerations
If we substitute these expressions into f(x) = x ln x—which entails
f ′(x) = ln x + 1,
f ′′(x) = 1x
—and add the results together, we obtain
M
#
m=1
* M
#
n=1
wn|xmn
′
|2
+
ln
* M
#
n=1
wn|xmn
′
|2
+
≈,M
n=1
!,M
n=1wn|x0
mn|2"
ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
mn|2"
· ϵ0
+
$
ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
1n|2"
−ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
2n|2"%
· ,M
n=12wnR(¯θx0
1n¯x0
2n) · ϵ1
+
−
$
ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
1n|2"
−ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
2n|2"%
·
$!,M
n=1wn|x0
1n|2"
−
!,M
n=1wn|x0
2n|2"%
+ 1
*
,M
n=1wn|x0
1n|2 +
,M
n=1wn|x0
2n|2
+!,M
n=12wnR(¯θx0
1n¯x0
2n)
"5
· ϵ2
For the expression on the right to be maximal the term of order ϵ1 must vanish
and the term of order ϵ2 must be ⩽0. The ﬁrst of those is the product of two
factors,
ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
1n|2"
−ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
2n|2"
and
,M
n=12wnR(¯θx0
1n¯x0
2n)
If the ﬁrst of those is zero then the leading term in the ϵ2-coeﬃcient (which is
always ⩽0) is also zero, so that the second term (which clearly is always ⩾0)
must vanish in order that the entire coeﬃcient be ⩽0. This means that
,M
n=12wnR(¯θx0
1n¯x0
2n) = 0
Therefore the second factor in the ϵ1-coeﬃcient must vanish in any event, which
we may also express by writing
2R
!
¯θ · ,M
n=1wnx0
1n¯x0
2n
"
= 0
Since this goes over into absolute value of the ,M
n=1 for appropriate θ, we must
have ,M
n=1wnx0
1n¯x0
2n = 0. And since we can replace the subscripts 1, 2 by any
two diﬀerent k, j = 1, 2, . . . , M we have
M
#
n=1
wnx0
kn¯x0
jn = 0
:
k ̸= j
That is, the unitary coordinate transformation with the matrix {x0
mn} brings
the diagonal matrix with elements w1, w2, . . . again into diagonal form. Since


3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
the diagonal elements are the multipliers (or eigenvalues) of the matrix, they
are not changed by the coordinate transformation, but are at most permuted.
Before the transformation they were the wm (m = 1, . . . M); afterwards they
are the ,M
n=1wn|x0
mn|2 (m = 1, . . . M). The sums
M
#
m=1
wm ln wm
and
M
#
m=1
!,M
n=1wn|x0
mn|2"
ln
!,M
n=1wn|x0
mn|2"
then have the same values. Hence there is at any rate a maximum at
xmn =
-
for
m = n
for
m ̸= n
as was asserted.
Let us determine when the equality holds in ⋆. If it does hold, then
∞
#
n=1
(Uχn, χn) ln(Uχn, χn)
assumes its maximum value not only for χn = ψn (n = 1, 2, . . .)—these are
the eigenfunctions of U (see above)—but also for χn = φn (n = 1, 2, . . .)
with χ1, χ2, . . . running through all complete orthonormal sets.
This holds
in particular if only the ﬁrst M among the φn are transformed (i.e., χn = φn
for n > M) and hence, of course, transformed unitarily among each other.
Let µmn = (Uφm, φn) (m, n = 1, . . . , M) and let v1, . . . , vM be the eigenvalues
of a ﬁnite-dimensional (Hermitian and deﬁnite) matrix {µmn}, and let {αmn}
(m, n = 1, . . . , M) be the matrix that transforms {µmn} to diagonal form. This
transforms the φ1, . . . , φM into ω1, . . . , ωM:
φm =
M
#
n=1
αmnωn
:
m = 1, . . . , M
Then
Uωn = vn ωn
and therefore
(Uωm, ωn) =
-
vn
for
m = n
for
m ̸= n
For
ξm =
M
#
n=1
xmn ωn
:
m = 1, . . . , M and {xmn} unitary
we have
(Uξk, ξj) =
M
#
n=1
vnxkn¯xjn
Because of the assumption regarding the φ1, . . . , φM the expression
M
#
m=1
!,M
n=1vn|xmn|2"
ln
!,M
n=1vn|xmn|2"
takes on its maximum when xmn = αmn. According to our previous proof, it


Chapter V: General Considerations
follows from this that
M
#
n=1
vnαkn¯αjn = 0
:
k ̸= j
i.e., (Uφk, φj) = 0 for k ̸= j (k, j = 1, . . . M).
This must hold for all M, therefore Uφk is orthogonal to all φj, k ̸= j,
and hence it is equal to wk′ φk (wk′ a constant). Consequently, the φ1, φ2, . . .
are eigenfunctions of U.
The corresponding eigenvalues are w1′ , w2′ , . . . (and
therefore a permutation of w1, w2, . . .). Under these circumstances
U′ =
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn) · P[φn] =
∞
#
n=1
wn
′ · P[φn] = U
We have therefore found:
The process 1
U −→U′ =
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn) · P[φn]
(φ1, φ2, . . . are the eigenfunctions of the operator R belonging to
the measured quantity R) never diminishes the entropy. Actually,
it increases the entropy unless all φ1, φ2, . . . are eigenfunctions of
U, in which case U = U′. Moreover, in the case just mentioned U
commutes with R, and this is characteristic of that case (because it
is equivalent to the existence of common eigenfunctions: see II.10).
Hence the process 1 is irreversible in all cases in which it eﬀects any
change at all.
The reversibilityquestion will nowbe treated forprocesses 1, 2 byarguments
that proceed independently of phenomenological thermodynamics, pursuant
to the second point of the two-point program that was put forward at the
beginning of section V.2.
The mathematical method by which this can be
accomplished we already know: if the second law of thermodynamics holds,
the entropy must be equal to −NκTr(U ln U), and this does not decrease in any
process 1, 2. We now treat −NκTr(U ln U) merely as a calculated quantity—
independently of its entropic meaning—and investigate how it responds to
processes 1, 2.200
In 2 we have
U −→Ut = e−i
ℏtHUe
i
ℏtH
= AUA
–1
with
A = e−i
ℏtH
Since f →Af, because of the unitary nature of A, is an isomorphic mapping
of the Hilbert space on itself which transforms each operator P into APA
–1, it
200 Naturally, we could neglect the factor Nκ and look only to −Tr(U ln U).
Or to −NTr(U ln U) if we wish to preserve proportionality to the number N of
elements.


3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
is always the case that F(APA
–1) = AF(P)A
–1. Consequently,
Ut ln Ut = A · U ln U · A
–1
Hence
Tr(Ut ln Ut) = Tr(U ln U)
i.e., our quantity −NκTr(U ln U) is constant under 2.
We have already
established what happens under 1, and have in fact done so without reference to
the second law of thermodynamics:
if U changes (i.e., U
̸=
U′) then
−NκTr(U ln U) increases, while for unchanged U (i.e., U = U′, or ψ1, ψ2, . . .
eigenfunctions of R, or U, R commutative) it naturally remains unchanged. In
an intervention composed of several 1 and 2 (in arbitrary number and order)
−NκTr(U ln U) remains unchanged if each process 1 is ineﬀective (i.e., causes
no change), but in all other cases it increases.
Therefore, if only interventions 1, 2 are taken into consideration, then each
process 1 which eﬀects any change at all is irreversible.
It is worth noting that there are other expressions—simpler than Tr(U ln U)
—which do not decrease under 1 and are constant under 2.
The largest
eigenvalue of U provides an example.
For 2 it is invariant, as are all the
eigenvalues of U, while under 1 the eigenvalues w1, w2, . . . of U go over into
the eigenvalues of U′:
,∞
n=1wn|x1n|2,
,∞
n=1wn|x2n|2,
. . .
(see again the considerations earlier in this section). By the unitary nature of
the matrix {xmn}
,∞
n=1|x1n|2 = 1,
,∞
n=1|x2n|2 = 1,
. . .
so all these numbers are ⩽the largest wn.
(A maximal wn exists since all
wn ⩾0 and ,M
n=1wn = 1 entails wn →0.) Now since it is possible so to change
U that
−Tr(U ln U) = −,∞
n=1wn ln wn
remains invariant but that the largest wm decreases, we see that these are
changes which are possible according to phenomenological thermodynamics—
therefore they can actually be executed by our gas processes—but which can
never be brought about by successive applications of 1, 2 alone. This proves
that our introduction of gas processes was indeed necessary.
Instead of −Tr(U ln U) we could also consider Tr(F(U)) for appropriate
functions F(x). That this increases under 1 when U ̸= U′ (for U = U′, as
well as under 2, it is of course invariant) can be proved, as was done for
F(x) = −x ln x, if the special properties of this function of which we made
use also pertain to F(x). These are: F ′′(x) < 0 and the monotonic decrease
of F ′(x), but the latter follows from the former.
Therefore, for our non-
thermodynamic irreversibility considerations we could use any Tr(F(U)) in


Chapter V: General Considerations
which F(x) is convex from above (meaning F ′′(x) < 0) on the interval 0 ⩽x ⩽1
which contains all the eigenvalues of U.
Finally, it should be shown that the mixing of two ensembles U, V (say in
the ratio α : β, α > 0, β > 0, α + β = 1) is also not entropy-diminishing
−Tr
(
(αU + β V) ln(αU + βV)
)
⩾−αTr(U ln U) −β Tr(V ln V)
and that this also holds when −x ln x is replaced by any convex F(x). The
proof is left to the reader.
We turn now to an investigation of the stationary equilibrium distribution;
i.e., the mixture of maximum entropy, when the energy is given. The latter
is, of course, to be understood to mean that the expectation value of the
energy is prescribed: only this interpretation is admissible in view of the method
indicated in Note 184 for the thermodynamical investigation of statistical
ensembles. Consequently, only such mixtures will be allowed for the U of which
TrU = 1 and TrUH = E, where H is the energy operator and E is the prescribed
energy expectation value. Under these auxiliary conditions, −NκTr(U ln U) is
to be made a maximum. We also make the simplifying assumption that H has
a pure discrete spectrum, with eigenvalues W1, W2, . . . (some of which may be
multiple) and eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . .
Let R be a quantity whose operator R has the same eigenfunctions
φ1, φ2, . . . as H but only distinct (or simple) eigenvalues. Measurement of R
transforms U (by 2) into
U′ =
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn)P[φn]
and therefore −NκTr(U ln U) increases unless U = U′. Also, TrU and TrUH do
not change—the latter because the φn are eigenfunctions of H, and therefore
(Hφm, φn) vanishes for m ̸= n:
Tr(U′H) =
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn)Tr(P[φn]H)
=
∞
#
n=1
(Uφn, φn)(Hφn, φn)
=
∞
#
m,n=1
(Uφm, φn)(Hφn, φm) = Tr(UH)
as follows also from the commutativity of R and H (i.e., from the simultaneous
measurability of R and energy). Consequently, the desired maximum is the
same if we limit ourselves to such U′; i.e., to statistical operators with
eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . . And furthermore, it is assumed only among these.


3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
Therefore
U =
∞
#
n=1
wnP[φn]
and—since U, UH and U ln U all have the same eigenfunctions φn but the
respective eigenvalues wn, wnWn and wn ln wn—it suﬃces to make
−Nκ
∞
#
n=1
wn ln wn
a maximum, subject to the auxiliary conditions
∞
#
n=1
wn = 1
and
∞
#
n=1
wnWn = E
This is exactly the same problem as that which is encountered in connection
with the corresponding equilibrium problem in ordinary gas theory,201 and is
solved in the same way. According to the well-known procedure for extremum
calculations, we must solve
∂
∂wn
!
∞
#
m=1
wm ln wm
"
+ α ∂
∂wn
!
∞
#
m=1
wm
"
+ β ∂
∂wn
!
∞
#
m=1
wmWm
"
= 0
in which α, β are suitable constants (Lagrange multipliers) and n = 1, 2, . . . .
That is,
(ln wn + 1) + α + βWn = 0
whence
wn = e−1−α−βWn = ae−βWn
where
a = e−1−α
From ,∞
n=1wn = 1 it follows that
a =
,∞
n=1e−βWn
and therefore
wn =
e−βWn
,∞
m=1e−βWm
And because of ,∞
n=1wnWn = E we have
,∞
n=1Wne−βWn
,∞
m=1e−βWm
= E
which determines β. If, as is customary, we introduce the “partition function”
Z(β) =
∞
#
n=1
e−βWn = Tr(e−β H)
201 See, for example, Planck, Theorie der W¨armstrahlung, Leipzig, 1913.


Chapter V: General Considerations
(see Notes 183, 184 for this and the following) then
Z′(β) = −
∞
#
n=1
Wne−βWn = −Tr(He−β H)
and the condition that determines β becomes
−Z′(β)
Z(β) = E
(We are making the assumption here that ,∞
n=1e−βWn and ,∞
n=1Wme−βWn
converge for all β > 0; i.e., that Wn →∞for n →∞, and that in fact they
do so with suﬃcient rapidity: for example, Wn/ ln n →∞suﬃces.) We then
obtain the following expressions for U itself:
U =
∞
#
n=1
ae−βWnP[φn] = ae−β H =
e−β H
Tr(e−β H) = e−β H
Z(β)
The properties of the equilibrium ensemble U (which is determined by the
values of E or of β, and which therefore depends on a parameter, as it must)
can now be determined by methods customary in gas theory.
The entropy of our equilibrium ensemble is
S = −NκTr(U ln U) = −NκTr
!e−β H
Z(β) ln e−β H
Z(β)
"
= −Nκ
Z(β)Tr
e−β H(
−βH −ln Z(β)
)7
= βNκ
Z(β)Tr(He−β H) + Nκ ln Z(β)
Z(β)
Tr(e−β H)
= Nκ
−β Z′(β)
Z(β) + ln Z(β)
and the total energy is
NE = −N Z′(β)
Z(β)
(This—not E itself—is to be considered in conjunction with S.) Thus U, S
and NE are expressed as functions of β. Instead of inverting the last equation
(i.e., expressing β as a function of E) it is more practical to determine the
temperature T of the equilibrium mixture, and to reduce everything to this.
This is done as follows:
Our equilibrium mixture is brought into contact with a heat reservoir of
temperature T ′ and energy NdE is transferred to it from that reservoir. The
two laws of thermodynamics require, then, that the total energy must remain
unchanged, and that the entropy must not decrease. Consequently, the heat


3. Reversibility and Equilibrium Problems
reservoir loses the energy NdE and therefore its entropy increase is −NdE/T ′,
and we must now have
dS −NdE
T ′
=
! 1
N
dS
dE −1
T ′
"
NdE ⩾0
On the other hand, NdE ⩾
< 0 must hold according to whether T ′ ⩾
< T because
the colder body absorbs energy from the warmer. Consequently T ′ ⩾
< T implies
N
dS
dE −1
T ′ ⩾
< 0
i.e.,
T ′ ⩾
< N dE
dS =
N dE
dβ
dS
dβ
Hence
T =
N dE
dβ
dS
dβ
= −1κ
( Z′(β)
Z(β)
)′
(
ln Z(β) −β Z′(β)
Z(β)
)′
= −1κ
( Z′(β)
Z(β)
)′
−β
( Z′(β)
Z(β)
)′ = 1
κβ
i.e.,
β =
κT
which we can use to express U, S and NE as functions of temperature.
The similarity of the expressions obtained above for the entropy, equilibrium
ensemble, etc. to the corresponding results of classical thermodynamical theory
is striking. Look ﬁrst to the entropy −NκTr(U ln U):
U =
∞
#
n=1
wnP[φn]
refers to a mixture of ensembles P[φ1], P[φ2], . . . with relative weights w1, w2, . . .;
i.e., Nw1 φ1-systems, Nw2 φ2 -systems, . . . . The Boltzmann entropy of this
ensemble is obtained with the aid of the “thermodynamic probability”
N!
(Nw1)!(Nw2)! · · ·
It is the “κ-fold logarithm.”201 Since N is large, we may approximate the
factorials by the Stirling formula x! ≈
√
2πxe−xxx and then
N!
(Nw1)!(Nw2)!···
becomes essentially
−Nκ
∞
#
n=1
wn ln wn
—and this is exactly −NκTr(U ln U).


Chapter V: General Considerations
Consider now the equilibrium ensemble
U = e−H/κT
(we neglect the normalization factor 1/Z(β)), which can be written
∞
#
n=1
e−Wn/κT P[φn]
and refers therefore to a mixture of states P[φ1], P[φ2], . . .; i.e., of stationary
states with energies W1, W2, . . . with the respective (relative) weights
e−W1/κT ,
e−W2/κT ,
. . .
If an energy value is multiple, say Wn1 = Wn2 = · · · = Wnν = W, then
P[φn1] + P[φn2] + · · · + qP[φnν ]
appears in the equilibrium ensemble with weight e−W/κT , which is to say: in
the correctly normalized mixture
1ν
!
P[φn1] + P[φn2] + · · · + qP[φnν ]
"
appears (see the beginning of IV.3) with weight νe−W/κT .
But the classical
“canonical ensemble” is—apart from the appearance of the speciﬁcally quantum
mechanical construct 1
ν
(
P[φn1] +P[φn2] +· · ·+qP[φnν ]
)
—deﬁned in exactly the
same way: this is known as Boltzmann’s Theorem.201
For T →0 the weights e−Wn/κT approach 1, and therefore our U tends to
∞
#
n=1
P[φn] = I
Consequently, U ≈I is the absolute equilibrium state if no energy restrictions
apply—a result we had obtained already in IV.3. We see that the “a priori equal
probability of the quantum orbits” (i.e., of the simple non-degenerate ones—in
general the multiplicity of the eigenvalues is the a priori weight: see discussion
above) follows automatically from this theory.
It remains to ascertain how much can be said non-thermodynamically
about the equilibrium ensemble U of a given energy; i.e., what can be deduced
only from the fact that U is stationary (does not change in the course of time,
under process 2), and that it remains unchanged in all measurements which do
not aﬀect the energy (i.e., measurements of quantities R that are, under process
1, measurable simultaneously with energy, and that correspond therefore to
operators R that commute with H and have the same eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . .
as H).


4. The Macroscopic Measurement
Because of the diﬀerential equation ∂
∂tU = i
ℏ(UH−HU) the former condition
requires only that H, U commute. The latter condition means that if φ1, φ2, . . .
comprise a complete eigenfunction set of H then U = U′. Let the corresponding
eigenvalues of H be W1, W2, . . . and those of U be w1, w2, . . . . If Wj = Wk we
can replace φj, φk by
φj + φk
√
,
φj −φk
√
for H. These, therefore, are also eigenfunctions of U, from which it follows that
wj = wk. Therefore, a function F(x) with F(Wn) = wn (n = 1, 2, . . .) can be
constructed, and F(H) = U. It is clear that this is suﬃcient, and that it implies
the commutativity of H and U.
So we have U = F(H), but no speciﬁc form is assigned to F(x).
In
particular, the result
F(x) =
Z(β)e−βx
:
β =
κT
we achieved by other means is not enforced. From TrU = 1 and Tr(UH) = 1 it
follows that
∞
!
n=1
F(Wn) = 1
and
∞
!
n=1
WnF(Wn) = E
but with this, all that this method can supply is exhausted.
4. THE MACROSCOPIC MEASUREMENT
Although our entropy expression is, as we saw, completely analogous to
classical entropy, it is still surprising that it is invariant under normal temporal
evolution of the system (process 2), and increases only in consequence of
measurements (process 1). In classical theory—where measurements in general
played no role—its increase, as a rule, resulted from the ordinary mechanical
evolution of the system. It is incumbent upon us to clear up this apparently
paradoxical situation.
A familiar classical thermodynamic argument runs as follows: Imagine a
container of volume V which is bisected by a partition. On one side of the
partition are M molecules of gas (assumed, for simplicity, to be an ideal gas) at
temperature T. We allow the gas to expand isothermally and reversibly 1
2V →V
by pushing against the partition, doing work which we utilize, and remaining
isothermal by drawing heat from a large heat reservoir at temperature T. The
entropy of the reservoir decreases by Mκ ln 2 (see Note 195), and therefore the
entropy of the gas increases by that same amount. If, on the other hand, we
had simply removed (or punctured) the partition the gas would have diﬀused
into the (previously empty) other half of the enclosure; the gas entropy would
again have increased by Mκ ln 2, but now without any corresponding entropy
compensation taking place. The process is consequently irreversible, for the


Chapter V: General Considerations
entropy has increased in the course of the simple temporal evolution of the
system (diﬀusion). Why does our theory give nothing similar?
The situation is best clariﬁed if we set M = 1. Thermodynamics is still
valid for such a one-molecule gas, and it is true that its entropy increases by
κ ln 2 if its volume is doubled. Nevertheless, this diﬀerence is actually κ ln 2
only if one knows no more about the molecule than that it was found initially
in volume 1
2V and later in volume V . For example, if the molecule is in the
volume V but it is known whether it is on the right or left side of the middle of
the enclosure, then we could insert a partition in the middle and allow this to be
pushed by the molecule (isothermally and reversibly) to (respectively) the left
or right end of the cylindrical enclosure. During this process, mechanical work
κT ln 2 is performed; i.e., this amount of energy is drawn from the reservoir.
Consequently, at the end of the process the molecule is again in volume V , but
we no longer know whether it is left or right of the middle and there has been
a compensating entropy decrease of κ ln 2 (in the reservoir). That is, we have
exchanged our knowledge for the entropy decrease κ ln 2.202 Or: the entropy is
the same in volume V as in volume 1
2V , provided we know, in the ﬁrst-mentioned
case, in which half of the enclosure the molecule is to be found. Therefore, if
we knew all the properties (position and momentum) of the molecule before the
diﬀusion process was initiated we could calculate at each subsequent moment
whether it is on left or right, and entropy would not have changed. If, however,
the only information at our disposal were the macroscopic information that the
molecule was initially in the right (or left) half of the enclosure, then entropy
would increase upon diﬀusion.
For a classical observer, who knows all coordinates and momenta, the
entropy is therefore constant,
and is in fact 0,
since the Boltzmann
“thermodynamic probability” is 1 (see the reference in Note 201)—just as in our
theory for states U = P[φ], since these again correspond to the highest possible
state of knowledge of the observer, relative to the system.
The time-variations of entropy are based then on the fact that the observer
does not know everything—that he cannot ﬁnd out (measure) everything that
is measurable in principle. His senses allow him to perceive only the so-called
macroscopic quantities.
But this clariﬁcation of the apparent contradiction
mentioned at the outset imposes upon us an obligation to investigate the precise
analog of classical macroscopic entropy for quantum mechanical ensembles;
i.e., the entropy as seen by an observer who cannot measure all quantities,
but only a few special quantities, namely, the macroscopic ones.
And even
202 L. Szilard (see the reference in Note 194) has shown that one cannot get
this “knowledge” without a compensating entropy increase κ ln 2. In general,
κ ln 2 is the “thermodynamic value” of knowledge which takes the form of
distinguishing between two alternative cases.
All attempts to carry out the
process described above without knowledge of in which half of the enclosure
the molecule is initially located can be shown to be invalid, though they may
occasionally lead to very complicated automatic mechanisms.


4. The Macroscopic Measurement
these, under certain circumstances, with only limited accuracy.
In III.3 we learned that all measurements of limited accuracy can be replaced
by absolutely accurate measurement of other quantities which are functions of
them, and which have discrete spectra. Now if R is such a quantity, and R its
operator, and if λ(1), λ(2), . . . are the distinct eigenvalues, then the measurement
of R is equivalent to answering the following questions:
“Is R = λ(1)?”,
“Is R = λ(2)?”,
. . .
In fact, we can also say directly: Assume that S, with operator S, is to be
measured with limited accuracy—say that one wishes to determine within which
of the intervals cn−1 < λ ⩽cn (· · · c−2 < c−1 < c0 < c1 < c2 < · · ·) it lies. This
becomes a case of answering these questions:
“Does S lie in cn−1 < λ ⩽cn?”
:
n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .
Now, such questions correspond, by III.5, to projections E whose quantities
E (which have only two values: 0 or 1) are actually to be measured. In our
examples, the E are the functions Fn(R), n = 1, 2, . . . in which
Fn(λ) =
"
for
λ = λ(n)
otherwise
or the functions Gn(S), n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . in which
Gn(λ) =
# 1
for
cn−1 < λ ⩽cn
otherwise
and the corresponding E are Fn(R) or G(S), respectively. Therefore, instead of
giving the macroscopically measurable quantities S (together with statements
of the macroscopically attainable measurement precision), we may equivalently
give the questions E that are answered by the macroscopic measurements, or
their projections E (see III.5).
Characterization of the macroscopic observer
comes therefore to this: speciﬁcation of his E. (Thus, classically, one might
characterize him by stating that he can measure temperature and pressure in
each cm3 of the gas volume—perhaps with certain precision limitations—but
nothing else.203)
Let us consider the method by which two non-simultaneously measurable
quantities (for example: the coordinate q and the momentum p; see III.4) can
be measured simultaneously with limited precision. Let the mean errors be ϵ, η
respectively (according to the uncertainty principle ϵη ∼h). The discussion in
III.4 showed that with such limited precision requirements such measurements
are indeed possible:
the q (position) measurement is performed with light
wave lengths that are not too short, and the p (momentum) measurement
is performed with light wave trains that are not too long.
If everything is
203 This characterization of the macroscopic observer is due to E. Wigner.


Chapter V: General Considerations
properly arranged, then the actual measurements consist in detecting two light
quanta in some way (perhaps by means of photographic plates): one (in the
q measurement) is the light quantum scattered by the Compton eﬀect; the
other (in the p measurement) is reﬂected, changed in frequency (by the Doppler
eﬀect) and then (to measure that changed frequency) deﬂected by an optical
device (prism, diﬀraction grating). By the end of the experiment, two light
quanta have produced two black spots on two photographic plates, and from the
locations of the spots (directions of the light quanta) we can calculate q and p.
We must emphasize here that nothing prevents us from determining (with
arbitrary precision) the locations of the spots (directions of the light quanta),
because these are obviously simultaneously measurable (they are coordinates
of two diﬀerent objects). However, excessive precision at this point is not of
much help for the measurement of q and p. As was shown in III.4, the relation of
the spot-coordinates to q and p is such that the uncertainties ϵ, η persist, even
if the spot-coordinates are measured with arbitrarily great precision, and the
apparatus cannot be arranged so that ϵη ≪h.
Therefore, if we introduce the spot-coordinates themselves (or directions
of the light quanta) as physical quantities (with operators Q′, P′) then we see
that Q′, P′ are commutative, but the operators Q, P belonging to q, p can be
described in terms of them with no higher precision than ϵ, η respectively.
Let the quantities belonging to Q′, P′ be q ′, p′.
The interpretation that the
actual macroscopically measurable quantities are not the q, p themselves but
are in fact q ′, p′ is a very plausible one (it is, indeed, the q ′, p′ that are in fact
measured), and it is in accord with our postulated simultaneous measurability of
all macroscopic quantities.
It is reasonable to attribute to this result a general signiﬁcance, and to
view it as disclosing a characteristic of the macroscopic method of observation.
According to this, the macroscopic procedure consists of replacing all possible
operators A, B, C, . . ., which as a rule do not commute with each other, by
other operators A′, B′, C′, . . . (of which these are functions to within a certain
approximation) which do commute with each other. Since we can just as well
denote these functions of A′, B′, C′, . . . themselves by A′, B′, C′, . . ., we may say
this: the A′, B′, C′, . . . are approximations to the A, B, C, . . ., but commute exactly
with each other. If the respective numbers ϵA, ϵB, ϵC, . . . give measure to the
magnitudes of A′−A, B′−B, C′−C, . . . then we see that ϵAϵB will give order
of magnitude measure to AB −BA (generally ̸= 0), etc. This sets the limit
on the approximations that can be achieved. It is, of course, advisable when
enumerating the A, B, C, . . . to restrict oneself to those operators whose physical
quantities are accessible to macroscopic observation, at least to within a
reasonable approximation.
These wholly qualitative observations remain an empty program so long
as we cannot show that they require only things that are mathematically
practicable. Therefore, for the characteristic case Q, P, we shall discuss further
the question of the existence of the above Q′, P′ on a mathematical basis. For
this purpose, let ϵ, η be two positive numbers with ϵη = 1
2ℏ.
We seek two


4. The Macroscopic Measurement
commuting Q′, P′ such that Q′−Q, P′ −P have (in a sense still to be deﬁned
more precisely) the respective orders of magnitude ϵ, η.
We do this with quantities q ′, p′which are measurable with perfect precision;
i.e., Q′, P′ have pure discrete spectra. Since they commute there is a complete
orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . of eigenfunctions common to both (see II.10). Let
the corresponding eigenvalues of Q′, P′ be a1, a2, . . . and b1, b2, . . . , respectively.
Then
Q′=
∞
!
n=1
anP[φn]
P′=
∞
!
n=1
bnP[φn]
Arrange their measurement in such a manner that it creates one of the states
φ1, φ2, . . . .
To that end:
measure a quantity R whose operator R has
eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . and distinct eigenvalues c1, c2, . . . . Then Q′, P′ are
functions of R. That this measurement implies measurement of Q and P in
approximate fashion is clearly implied by this: In the state φn the values of
Q, P are expressed approximately by the values of Q′, P′; i.e., by an, bn. That
is, their dispersions about these values are small. These dispersions are the
expectation values of the quantities (q −an)2, (p −bn)2; i.e.,
$
(Q −anI)2φn, φn
%
= ∥(Q −anI)φn∥2 = ∥Qφn −anφn∥2
$
(P −bn I)2φn, φn
%
= ∥(P −bn I)φn∥2 = ∥Pφn −bn φn∥2
They are measures of the squares of the diﬀerences of (respectively) Q′and Q, P′
and P, so must be approximately ϵ2 and η2, respectively. We therefore require
∥Qφn −anφn∥<∼ϵ
∥Pφn −bn φn∥<∼η
Instead of speaking of Q′, P′ it becomes then more appropriate only to seek a
complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . for which, for a suitable choice of a1, a2, . . .
and b1, b2, . . . , the above estimates hold.
Individual φ (with ∥φ∥= 1) for which (for suitable a, b)
∥Qφ −aφ∥= ϵ
∥Pφ −bφ∥= η
are known from III.4:
φσ,ρ,γ = φσ,ρ,γ(q) =
$ 2γ
h
% 1
4 exp
&
−πγ
h (q −σ)2 + i 2πρ
h q
'
Because of ϵη = 1
2ℏ=
h
4π we have again
ϵ =
(
hγ
4π
η =
(
h
4πγ
(i.e., γ = ϵ/η) and we now choose a = σ, b = ρ.
We now must construct a complete orthonormal set with the help of these
φρ,σ,γ. Since σ is the Q expectation value, and ρ is the P expectation value, it
is plausible that σ, ρ should each run through a set of numbers independently
of each other. And, in fact, that they should do so in such a way that the σ-set
has approximately the density ϵ and the ρ-set approximately the density η. It
proves practical in view of 2√π · ϵ = √hγ and 2√π · η =
)
h/γ to choose units
so that
σ =
)
hγ · µ
and
ρ =
)
h/γ · ν
:
µ, ν = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .


Chapter V: General Considerations
The functions
ψµ,ν(q) = φµ√
hγ,ν√
h/γ,γ(q)
ought then to correspond to the φn (n = 1, 2, . . .). It is obviously irrelevant
that we have two indices µ, ν in place of the one n.
These functions are normalized, and satisfy
∥Qψµ,ν −µ
)
hγ · ψµ,ν∥= ϵ
∥Pψµ,ν −ν
)
h/γ · ψµ,ν∥= η
but are not orthogonal. If we now orthogonalize them (in sequence) by the
Schmidt process (see II.2, proof of theorem 8) then we can prove completeness
of the resulting orthonormal set ψµ,ν
′
without any particular diﬃculties, and can
also establish the estimates
∥Qψµ,ν
′
−µ
)
hγ · ψµ,ν
′ ∥= Cϵ
∥Pψµ,ν
′
−ν
)
h/γ · ψµ,ν
′ ∥= C η
The value C ≈60 has been obtained in this way, and could probably be
reduced.
The proof of this fact leads to rather tedious calculations which,
however, require no new concepts, so we will omit them. The factors C ≈60
are not important since ϵη =
2ℏ, measured in macroscopic (CGS) units, is
exceedingly small (of the order 10−28).
Summing up, we can say that it is justiﬁed to assume the commutativity
of all macroscopic operators, and in particular of the macroscopic projections
E introduced above.
The E correspond to all macroscopically answerable questions E; i.e., to
all discriminations between alternatives in the system under investigation that
can be carried out macroscopically. They are all commutative. We can conclude
from II.5 that I −E belongs along with E to the set of all projectors
associated with macroscopically answerable questions (propositions), and that
EF, E + F −EF, E −EF belong along with E, F. It is reasonable to assume that
every system S admits of only a ﬁnite number of such questions; i.e., only a
ﬁnite number of such operators: E1, E2, . . . , En. We introduce the notation
E(+) = E,
E(−) = I −E
and consider all 2n products
E(s1)
E(s2)
· · · E(sn)
n
:
(s1, s2, . . . , sn = ±)
Any two diﬀerent ones among these have the product O, for if E(s1)
· · · E(sn)
n
and E(t1)
· · · E(tn)
n
are two such which diﬀer in (say) the νth place, then their
product presents the factor E(+)
ν
E(−)
ν
, which is O. Each Eν is the sum of several
such products: indeed
Eν =
!
s1 . . . sν
/ . . . sn = ±
E(s1)
· · · E
(sν−1)
ν−1
E(+)
ν E
(sν+1)
ν+1
· · · E(sn)
n


4. The Macroscopic Measurement
Among these products, consider the ones which are diﬀerent from O. Call them
E1
′, E2
′, . . . , Em
′ . (Evidently m ⩽2n, but actually m ⩽n −1 since these must
occur among the E1, E2, . . . , En and be ̸= O.) Now clearly: Eµ
′ ̸= O; Eµ
′Eν
′ = O
for µ ̸= ν; each Eµ is the sum of several Eµ
′. (From the latter it follows that
n = 2m.) It should be noted that Eµ + Eν = Eρ
′ can never occur unless Eµ = O
and Eν = Eρ
′ or Eµ = Eρ
′ and Eν = O; otherwise Eµ, Eν would be sums of several
Eπ
′ = O and therefore Eρ
′ the sum of ⩾2 terms Eπ
′ (possibly with repetitions).
By II.4, theorems 15,16 these would all diﬀer from one another; since their
number is ⩾2 and all are ̸= O they also diﬀer from Eρ
′. Therefore their product
with Eρ
′ would be O. Hence the product of their sum with Eρ
′ would also be O,
but this contradicts the assertion that their sum is equal to Eρ
′.
The properties E1
′, E2
′, . . . , Em
′ corresponding to the E1
′, E2
′, . . . , Em
′ are then
macroscopic properties of the following type: None is absurd. Every two are
mutually exclusive. Each macroscopic property obtains by disjunction of several
of them. None can be resolved by disjunction into two sharper macroscopic
properties. E1
′, E2
′, . . . , Em
′ therefore represent the farthest that one can go in
macroscopic discrimination, for they are macroscopically indecomposable.
In the following we shall not require that their number be ﬁnite, but only
that there exist macroscopically indecomposable properties E1
′, E2
′, . . . .
Let
their projections be E1
′, E2
′, . . ., all again diﬀerent from O, mutually orthogonal,
and each macroscopic E the sum of several of them.
Therefore I is also a sum of several of them. If Eν
′ did not occur in this
sum it would be orthogonal to each term and hence to the sum—that is, to I:
Eν
′ = Eν
′ · I = O, which is impossible. Therefore E1
′ + E2
′ + · · · = I. We now drop
the prime notation, writing simply E1, E2, . . . and E1, E2 . . . . The closed linear
manifolds belonging to these will be called M1, M2, . . . and their dimension
numbers s1, s2, . . .
If all the sn = 1 (i.e., all the Mn are one-dimensional) then Mn = [φn]
and En = P[φn], and because E1 + E2 + · · · = I the φ1, φ2, . . . would form a
complete orthonormal set. This would mean that macroscopic measurements
would themselves make possible a complete determination of the state of the
observed system. Since this is ordinarily not the case, we have in general sn > 1,
and in fact sn ≫1.
It should be observed, additionally, that the En—which are the elementary
building blocks of the macroscopic description of the world—correspond in
a certain sense to the cell division of phase space in classical theory.
We
have already seen that they can reproduce the behavior of non-commutative
operators in an approximate fashion—in particular, that of Q and P, which are
so important for phase space.
Now. . . what entropy does the mixture U have for an observer whose
indecomposable projections are E1, E2 . . . ?
Or, more precisely: How much
entropy can such an observer maximally obtain by transforming U into V
—i.e., what entropy increase (or decrease) can he (under suitable conditions


Chapter V: General Considerations
and the most favorable circumstances) produce in external objects as compen-
sation for the transition U →V?
First, it must be emphasized that he cannot distinguish between two
ensembles U, U′ if both give the same expectation value to En for each n;
i.e., if Tr(UEn) = Tr(U′En) : n = 1, 2, . . .. After some time, of course, such
discrimination may become possible, since U, U′ change according to 2, and
Tr(AUA
–1En) = Tr(AU′A
–1En)
:
A = e−i
ℏtH
must no longer hold.204 But we consider only measurements which are carried
out immediately. Under the above conditions we may therefore regard U, U′ as
indistinguishable. The observer—making use only of such semi-permeable walls
as transmit the φ of some En and reﬂect the remainder unchanged—can use
the method of V.2 to transform a U′ = *∞
n=1 xnEn into a V′ = *∞
n=1 ynEn
reversibly, and the entropy diﬀerence, since the entropy of U′ is −κTr(U′ ln U′),
will be given by
−κTr(V′ ln V′) + κTr(U′ ln U′)
To be sure, in order that such U′ with Tr(U′) = 1 exist in general, the TrEn
—i.e., the numbers sn—must be ﬁnite: we therefore assume that to be the
case. U′ has the s1-fold eigenvalue x1, the s2-fold eigenvalue x2 . . . . Therefore
−U′ ln U′ has the s1-fold eigenvalue −x1 ln x1, the s2-fold eigenvalue −x2 ln x2,
etc. Consequently Tr(U′) = 1 implies
∞
!
n=1
snxn = 1
and the entropy of U′ is given by
−κ
∞
!
n=1
snxn ln xn
Because of U′Em = *
n xnEnEm = xmEm we have Tr(U′Em)=xmTrEm=smxm
whence
xm = Tr(U′Em)
sm
and the entropy of U′ becomes
−κ
∞
!
n=1
Tr(U′En) ln Tr(U′En)
sn
204 If En commutes with H, and therefore with A, the equality still holds,
because
Tr(A·UA
–1En) = Tr(UA
–1En·A) = Tr(UA
–1AEn) = Tr(UEn)
But all En—i.e., all macroscopically observable quantities—are in no way all
commutative with H. Indeed, many such quantities—for example, the center of
gravity of a gas in diﬀusion—change appreciably with t; i.e., Tr(UEn) is not
constant. Since all macroscopic quantities do commute,His never a macroscopic
quantity; i.e., the energy cannot be measured macroscopically with complete
precision. This is plausible without additional comment.


4. The Macroscopic Measurement
For arbitrary U (TrU = 1) the entropy must given similarly by
−κ
∞
!
n=1
Tr(UEn) ln Tr(UEn)
sn
because if we set
xn = Tr(UEn)
sn
,
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
xnEn
then Tr(UEn) = Tr(U′En), and since U, U′ are indistinguishable they must have
the same entropy.
We must also mention the fact that this entropy is never less than the
customary entropy:
−κ
∞
!
n=1
Tr(UEn) ln Tr(UEn)
sn
⩾−κTr(U ln U)
with equality only in the case U = *∞
n=1 xnEn. By the results of V.3 this is
certainly the case if
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
Tr(UEn)
sn
En
can be obtained from U by several (not necessarily macroscopic) applications of
process 1 because on the left we then have −κTr(U′ ln U′), and U = *∞
n=1 xnEn
means U = U′. Now consider an orthonormal set φ(n)
1 , . . . , φ(n)
sn which spans the
closed linear manifold Mn belonging to En. Because of
∞
!
n=1
En = I
all φ(n)
ν
(n = 1, 2, . . . ; ν = 1, 2, . . . , sn) form a complete orthonormal set. Let R
be an operator with these eigenfunctions (and only distinct eigenvalues), and
R the physical quantity to which R corresponds. In the measurement of R we
get from U (by 1)
U′′ =
∞
!
n=1
sn
!
ν=1
(Uφ(n)
ν , φ(n)
ν ) · P[φ(n)
ν ]
Then, if we set
ψ(n)
µ
=
√sn
sn
!
ν=1
ei2π µν
sn φ(n)
ν
:
µ = 1, . . . , sn
the ψ(n)
, . . . , ψ(n)
sn form an orthogonal set which spans the same closed linear
manifold Mn as the φ(n)
1 , . . . , φ(n)
sn . Therefore the
ψ(n)
ν
:
n = 1, 2, . . . ; ν = 1, 2, . . . , sn
also form a complete orthonormal set, and we form an operator S with these
eigenfunctions, distinct eigenvalues and corresponding physical quantity S. We


Chapter V: General Considerations
note the validity of the following formulas:
+
P[φ(n)
ν ]ψ(m)
µ
, ψ(m)
µ
,
=



for
m ̸= n
1sn
for
m = n
sn
!
ν=1
P[φ(n)
ν ] =
sn
!
ν=1
P[ψ(n)
ν
] = En
In the measurement of S, therefore, U′′ becomes (by 1)
∞
!
m=1
sm
!
µ=1
(U′′ψ(m)
µ
, ψ(m)
µ
)P[ψ(m)
µ
]
=
∞
!
m=1
sm
!
µ=1
0 ∞
!
n=1
sn
!
ν=1
(Uφ(n)
ν , φ(n)
ν )
+
P[φ(n)
ν ]ψ(m)
µ
, ψ(m)
µ
,1
P[ψ(m)
µ
]
=
∞
!
m=1
sm
!
µ=1
0 sm
!
ν=1
(Uφ(m)
ν
, φ(m)
ν
)
sm
P[ψ(m)
µ
]
=
∞
!
m=1
sm
!
µ=1
Tr(UEm)
sm
· P[ψ(m)
µ
]
=
∞
!
m=1
Tr(UEm)
sm
Em = U′
Consequently, two processes 1 suﬃce to transform U into U′, and this is all we
need for the proof.
For states (U = P[φ], Tr(UEn) = (Enφ, φ) = ∥Enφ∥2) this entropy
−κ
∞
!
n=1
∥Enφ∥2 ln ∥Enφ∥2
sn
is no longer subject to the inconveniences of the “macroscopic” entropy. In
general, it is not constant in time (i.e., under process 2), and does not vanish
for all states U = P[φ]. That the Tr(UEn), from which our entropy was formed,
are not generally constant in time was discussed already in Note 204. It is easy
to determine when the state U = P[φ] has entropy 0: since
0 ⩽∥Enφ∥2
sn
⩽1
all summands
∥Enφ∥2 ln ∥Enφ∥2
sn


4. The Macroscopic Measurement
in the entropy expression are ⩽0.
All these must therefore vanish, which
requires
∥Enφ∥2
sn
= 0 else 1
The former means Enφ = 0, and the latter that ∥Enφ∥= √sn, but since
∥Enφ∥⩽1
and
sn ⩾1
this implies sn = 1 and ∥Enφ∥= ∥φ∥; i.e., Enφ = φn. That is: sn = 1, φ in Mn.
The latter certainly cannot hold for two diﬀerent n, but also it cannot hold at
all because then Enφ = 0 would always be true, and therefore φ = 0 since
*∞
n=1 En = I. Hence for exactly one n is it the case that φ is in Mn, and then
sn=1. But, since we determined that in general all sn ≫1, this is impossible.
So our entropy is always > 0.
Since the macroscopic entropy is always time variable, the next question to
be answered is this: Does it behave like the phenomenological thermodynamics
of the real world; i.e., does it predominantly increase? This question is answered
aﬃrmatively in classical mechanical theory by the so-called Boltzmann
H-theorem.
In that, however, certain statistical assumptions—namely, the
so-called “disorder assumptions”—must be made.205
In quantum mechanics
it was possible for the author to prove the corresponding theorem without such
assumptions.206
Since the detailed discussion of this subject, as well of the
ergodic theorem closely connected with it (see the reference cited in Note 206,
where this theorem is also proved) would go beyond the scope of this volume,
we cannot report on these investigations. The reader who is interested in this
problem can refer to the treatments in the references.
205 For the classical H-theorem, see Boltzmann, Vorlesungen ¨uber Gastheorie,
Leipzig, 1896, as well as the extremely instructive discussion by P. and T.
Ehrenfest in the article cited in Note 185. The “disorder assumptions” which
can take the place (in quantum mechanics) of those of Boltzmann have been
formulated by W. Pauli (Sommerfeld-Festschrift, 1928), and the H-theorem is
proved there with their help. More recently, the author has also succeeded in
proving the classical-mechanical ergodic theorem, see PNAS, January & March,
1932 as well as the improved treatment of G. D. Birkhoﬀ, PNAS December, 1931
& March, 1932.
206 Z. Physik 57 (1929).


 


CHAPTER VI
THE MEASURING PROCESS
1. FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM
In the discussion so far we have treated the relation of quantum mechanics to
the various causal and statistical methods of describing nature. In the course of
this we have found a peculiar dual nature of the quantum mechanical procedure
which could not be satisfactorily explained. Namely, we found that on the one
hand a state φ is transformed into the state φ′ under the action of an energy
operator H in the time interval 0 ⩽τ ⩽t:
∂
∂tφτ = −i
ℏHφτ
:
0 ⩽τ ⩽t
so if we write φ0 = φ, φt = φ′ then
φ′ = e−i
ℏtHφ
which is purely causal. A mixture U is correspondingly transformed into
U′ = e−i
ℏtHUe+ i
ℏtH
Therefore, as a consequence of the causal change of φ into φ′ the states U = P[φ]
go over into the states U′ = P[φ′] (process 2 in V.1).
On the other hand,
the state φ—which may refer to a quantity with a pure discrete spectrum,
distinct eigenvalues and eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . .—undergoes in a measurement
a change in which any of the states φ1, φ2, . . . may result, and in fact do result
with the respective probabilities |(φ, φ1)|2, |(φ, φ2)|2, . . . . That is, the mixture
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
|(φ, φn)|2P[φn]
obtains. More generally, the mixture U goes over into
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
|(Uφn, φn)|2P[φn]
(process 1 in V.1). Since the states go over into mixtures, the process is not
causal.


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
The diﬀerence between these two processes U →U′ is a very fundamental
one: aside from their diﬀerent statuses with regard to the principle of causality,
they also diﬀer in that the former is (thermodynamically) reversible, while the
latter is not (see V.3).
Let us now compare these circumstances with those which actually exist
in nature, or in its observation. First, it is inherently correct that measurement
or the related process of subjective perception is a new entity relative to the
physical environment, and is not reducible to the latter.
Indeed, subjective
perception leads us into the intellectual inner life of the individual, which is
extra-observational by its very nature, since it must be taken for granted by any
conceivable observation or experiment. (See the discussion above.) Nevertheless,
it is a fundamental requirement of the scientiﬁc viewpoint—the so-called
principle of psycho-physical parallelism—that it must be possible so to describe
the extra-physical process of subjective perception as if it were in the reality
of the physical world; i.e., to assign to its parts equivalent physical processes
in the objective environment, in ordinary space. (Of course, in this correlating
procedure there arises the frequent necessity of localizing some of these processes
at points which lie within the portion of space occupied by our own bodies.
But this does not alter the fact of their belonging to “the world about us,” the
objective environment referred to above.) In a simple example, these concepts
might be applied as follows: We wish to measure the temperature. If we want,
we can proceed numerically by looking to the mercury column in a thermometer,
and then say: “This is the temperature as measured by the thermometer.” But
we can carry the process further, and from the properties of mercury (which
can be explained in kinetic and molecular terms) we can calculate its heating,
expansion, and the resultant length of the mercury column, and then say: “This
length is seen by the observer.” Going still further, and taking the light source
into consideration, we could ﬁnd out the reﬂection of the light quanta on the
opaque mercury column, and the path taken by the reﬂected light quanta into
the eye of the observer, their refraction in the eye lens, and the formation of
an image on the retina, and then we would say: “This image is registered
by the retina of the observer.” And were our physiological knowledge greater
than it is today, we could go still further, tracing the chemical reactions which
produce the impression of this image on the retina, and in the optic nerve and
in the brain, and then in the end say: “These chemical changes of his brain
cells are perceived by the observer.” But in any case, no matter how far we
proceed—from the thermometer scale, to the mercury, to the retina, or into the
brain—at some point we must say: “And this is perceived by the observer.”
That is, we are obliged always to divide the world into two parts, the one being
the observed system, the other the observer. In the former we can follow all
physical processes (in principle at least) arbitrarily precisely. In the latter, this
is meaningless.
The boundary between the two is arbitrary to a very large
extent. In particular, we saw in the four diﬀerent possibilities considered in the
preceding example that the “observer”—in this sense—need not be identiﬁed
with the body of the actual observer: in one instance we included even the
thermometer in it, while in another instance even the eyes and optic nerve


1. Formulation of the Problem
were not included. That this boundary can be pushed arbitrarily far into the
interior of the body of the actual observer is the content of the principle of
psycho-physical parallelism. But this does not change the fact that in every
account the boundary must be put somewhere if the principle is not to be
rendered vacuous; i.e., if a comparison with experience is to be possible. Indeed,
experience only makes statements of this type: “An observer has made a certain
(subjective) observation,” and never any like this: “A physical quantity has a
certain value.”
Now quantum mechanics describes events which occur in observed portions
of the world, so long as they do not interact with the observing portion, and does
so by means of process 2 (V.1). But as soon such an interaction does occur—
i.e., a measurement is made—the theory requires application of process 1.
This duality is therefore fundamental to the theory.207 Danger, however, lies in
the fact that the principle of psycho-physical parallelism is violated so long as it
is not shown that the boundary between the observed system and the observer
can be displaced arbitrarily, in the sense given above.
In order to discuss this, let us divide the world into three parts: I, II, III.
Let I be the system actually observed, II the measuring instrument, and III
the actual observer.208 It is to be shown that the boundary can just as well be
drawn between I and II+III as between I+II and III. In comparison of the ﬁrst
and second cases of our introductory example, viewed in this light: I was the
system to be observed, II the thermometer, and III the light plus the observer.
In comparison of the second and third cases, I was the system to be observed
plus the thermometer, II was the light plus the eye of the observer, III was the
observer, from the retina on. In comparison of the third and fourth cases, I was
everything up to the retina of the observer, II was his retina, optic nerve and
brain, III was his abstract “ego.” That is, in one case 2 is to be applied to I and
1 to the interaction between I and II+III; in the other case 2 is to be applied
to I+II and 1 to the interaction between I+II and III. In both cases, III itself
remains outside of the calculation. Proof of the following assertion—that both
procedures give the same results regarding I (in both cases, this and only this
belongs to the observed part of the world)—is then our problem.
But in order to be able to accomplish this we must ﬁrst investigate more
closely the process of forming the union of two physical systems (such as leads
from I and II to I+II).
207 N. Bohr, Naturwiss. 17 (1929) was the ﬁrst to point out that the duality
which is necessitated by quantum formalism, by the quantum mechanical
description of nature, is fully justiﬁed by the physical nature of things, and
that it may be connected with the principle of psycho-physical parallelism.
208 The discussion which is carried out below, as well as in VI.3, contains
essential elements which the author owes to conversations with L. Szilard. See
also the similar considerations of Heisenberg in the reference cited in Note 181.


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
2. COMPOSITE SYSTEMS
As was stated at the end of the preceding section, we consider two physical
systems I, II (which do not necessarily have the meaning of I, II above) and their
combination I+II. In classical mechanics, I would have k degrees of freedom,
and therefore coordinates q1, . . . , qk, which we will abbreviate with the single
symbol q. Correspondingly, let II have ℓdegrees of freedom, and coordinates
r1, . . . , rℓwhich will be denoted r. Therefore, I+II has k +ℓdegrees of freedom
and coordinates q1, . . . , qk, r1, . . . , rℓor, more brieﬂy, q, r. In quantum mechanics
then the wave functions of I have the form φ(q), those of II the form ξ(r) and
those of I+II the form Φ(q, r). In the corresponding Hilbert spaces RI, RII and
RI+II the inner product is deﬁned
"
φ(q)ψ(q)dq,
"
ξ(r)η(r)dr
and
""
Φ(q, r)Ψ(q, r)dqdr
respectively. Corresponding to physical quantities in I, II and I+II are the
(hypermaximal) Hermitian operators ˙A, ¨A, A in RI, RII, RI+II respectively.
Each physical quantity in I is naturally also one in I+II, and its A is to be
obtained from its ˙A in this way: to obtain AΦ(q, r) consider r as a constant and
apply ˙A to the q-function Φ(q, r).209 This transformation rule is correct in any
case for the coordinate and momentum operators Q1, . . . , Qk and P1, . . . , Pk;
i.e.,
q1, . . . , qk, ℏ
i
∂
∂q1 , . . . , ℏ
i
∂
∂qk
(see I.2), and it conforms with the principles I, II in IV.2.210 We therefore adopt
the rule as a general postulate. (This is the customary procedure in quantum
mechanics.)
In the same way, each physical quantity in II is one also in I+II, and its ¨A
gives its A by the same rule: AΦ(q, r) equals ¨AΦ(q, r) if in the latter expression
q is taken as a constant, and Φ(q, r) is considered to be a function of r.
If φm(q) (m = 1, 2, . . .) is a complete orthonormal set in RI, and ξn(r)
(n = 1, 2, . . .) one in RII, then Φm|n(q, r) = φm(q)ξn(r) (m, n = 1, 2, . . .) is
clearly one in RI+II. The operators ˙A, ¨A and A can therefore be represented by
matrices{˙am|m′}, {¨an|n′}and{amn|m′n′}respectively (m, m′, n, n′ = 1, 2, . . .).211
209 It can easily be shown that if ˙A is Hermitian or hypermaximal, then so is A.
210 For I this is clear, and for II also so long as only polynomials are concerned.
For general functions it can be inferred from the fact that the correspondence
between a resolution of the identity and a Hermitian operator is not disturbed
in our transition ˙A →A.
211 Because of the large number and variety of indices, we here denote matrices
in a way which diﬀers from the notation used thus far.


2. Composite Systems
We shall make frequent use of this. The matrix representation means that
˙Aφm(q) =
∞
!
m′=1
˙am|m′φm′(q),
¨Aξn(r) =
∞
!
n′=1
¨an|n′ξn′(r)
and
AΦmn(q, r) =
∞
!
m′,n′=1
amn|m′n′Φm′n′(q, r)
i.e.,
Aφm(q)ξn(r) =
∞
!
m′,n′=1
amn|m′n′φm′(q)ξn′(r)
In particular, the correspondence ˙A →A means that
Aφm(q)ξn(r) = [ ˙Aφm(q)]ξn(r) =
∞
!
m′=1
˙am|m′φm′(q)ξn(r)
i.e.,
amn|m′n′ = ˙am|m′ · δn|n′
where
δn|n′ =
#
for
n = n′
for
n ̸= n′
Similarly, the correspondence ¨A →A implies amn|m′n′ = δm|m′ · ¨an|n′.
A statistical ensemble in I+II is characterized by its statistical operator
U or (equivalently) by its matrix {umn|m′n′}. This determines the statistical
properties of all quantities in I+II, and therefore also in I (and II). Consequently
there corresponds to it a statistical ensemble in I (or II) alone. In fact, an
observer who could perceive only I, and not II, would view the ensemble of
systems I+II as an instance of a system I. What, now, is the operator ˙U or
matrix { ˙um|m′} that belongs to this I ensemble? We determine it as follows:
The I quantity with matrix {˙am|m′} has the matrix {˙am|m′δn|n′} as an I+II
quantity, and therefore, by reason of a calculation in I, has the expectation
value
∞
!
m,m′=1
˙um|m′ ˙am′|m
while calculation in I+II gives
∞
!
m,n,m′,n′=1
umn|m′n′ ˙am′|mδn′|n =
∞
!
m,m′,n=1
umn|m′n ˙am′|m
=
∞
!
m,m′=1
$ ∞
!
n=1
umn|m′n
%
˙am′|m
For those expressions to be equal, we must have
˙um|m′ =
∞
!
n=1
umn|m′n


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
In the same way, our I+II ensemble, if only II is considered and I is ignored,
determines a statistical operator ¨U and matrix {¨un|n′}. By analogy, we obtain
¨un|n′ =
∞
!
m=1
umn|mn′
We have thus established the rules of correspondence for the statistical
operators of I, II and I+II, i.e., for ˙U, ¨U and U. They proved to be essentially
diﬀerent from the rules or correspondence among the operators ˙A, ¨A and A of
physical quantities.
It should be mentioned that our ˙U, ¨U, U correspondence depends only
apparently on the choice of the φm(q) and ξn(r). Indeed, it was derived from
an invariant condition (the implications of which are unique): namely, that
expectation values in I—whether obtained from ˙U or from U—are identical
(and similarly, for expectation values in II, whether obtained from ¨U or U).
U expresses the statistics in I+II, ˙U and ¨U those statistics restricted to
I and II. The question now arises: Do ˙U, ¨U determine U uniquely or not? In
general, one expects a negative answer because all “probability dependencies”
which may exist between between the two systems disappear as information
is reduced to that conveyed solely by ˙U and ¨U; i.e., to that concerning the
separated systems I and II. But if one knows the state of I precisely, and also
that of II, then “probability questions” do not arise: the state of I+II too is
then precisely known. An exact mathematical discussion is, however, preferable
to these qualitative considerations, and that we proceed now to provide.
The problem is, then: For two deﬁnite matrices { ˙um|m′} and {¨un|n′}, ﬁnd
a third deﬁnite matrix {umn|m′n′} such that
∞
!
n=1
umn|m′n = ˙um|m′
and
∞
!
m=1
umn|mn′ = ¨un|n′
(We note in passing that from
∞
!
m=1
˙um|m = 1
and
∞
!
n=1
¨un|n = 1
it follows directly that
∞
!
m,n=1
umn|mn = 1
i.e., that correct normalization is preserved.) This problem is always solvable:
for example, umn|m′n′ = ˙um|m′ · ¨un|n′ is always a solution (it is easily seen that
this matrix is deﬁnite). But the question arises as to whether this is the only
solution.


2. Composite Systems
We will show that this is the case if and only if at least one of the two
matrices { ˙um|m′} and {¨un|n′} refers to a pure state. First we prove the necessity
of this condition; i.e., the existence of multiple solutions if both matrices
correspond to mixtures. In such a case (see IV.2)
˙um|m′ = α ˙vm|m′ + β ˙wm|m′
¨un|n′
= γ ¨vn|n′ + δ ¨wn|n′
where ˙vm|m′, ˙wm|m′,¨vn|n′, ¨wn|n′ (all deﬁnite) diﬀer by more than a constant
factor, and where also
∞
!
m=1
˙vm|m =
∞
!
m=1
˙wm|m =
∞
!
n=1
¨vn|n =
∞
!
n=1
¨wn|n = 1
α, β, γ, δ > 0, α + β = 1 and γ + δ = 1. We easily verify that every matrix of
the form
umn|m′n′ = π ˙vm|m′¨vn|n′ + ρ ˙wm|m′¨vn|n′ + σ ˙vm|m′ ¨wn|n′ + τ ˙wm|m′ ¨wn|n′
with
π + σ = α
ρ + τ = β
π + ρ = γ
σ + τ = δ
and
π, ρ, σ, τ > 0
is a solution.
Then π, ρ, σ, τ can be chosen in an inﬁnite number of ways.
Because of α + β = γ + δ (= π + ρ + σ + τ) only three of the four equations are
independent. We can therefore write
σ = α −π
ρ = γ −π
τ = (δ −α) + π
and in order that all be > 0 we must require α −δ = γ −β < π < α, γ, which is
the case for inﬁnitely many π. Now diﬀerent π, ρ, σ, τ lead to diﬀerent umn|m′n′
because the
˙vm|m′¨vn|n′,
˙wm|m′¨vn|n′,
˙vm|m′ ¨wn|n′,
˙wm|m′ ¨wn|n′
are linearly
independent, since the ˙vm|m′, ˙wm|m′ are, and so are the ¨vn|n′, ¨wn|n′.
Next we prove suﬃciency, and here we may assume that ˙um|m′ corresponds
to a state (the other case is dealt with in the same way). Then ˙U = P[φ] and
since the complete orthonormal set φ1, φ2, . . . was arbitrary, we can assume
φ = φ1. ˙U = P[φ1] has the matrix
˙um|m′ =
& 1
for
m = m′ = 1
otherwise
Therefore
∞
!
n=1
umn|m′n =
& 1
for
m = m′ = 1
otherwise


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
In particular,
∞
!
n=1
umn|mn = 0
for
m ̸= 1
But because of the deﬁniteness of umn|m′n′ all umn|mn = (UΦmn, Φmn) ⩾0,
therefore in this case umn|mn = 0.
That is, (UΦmn, Φmn) = 0 and hence,
because of the deﬁniteness of U, also (UΦmn, Φm′n′) = 0 (see II.5, theorem 19)
where m′, n′ are arbitrary. That is, it follows from m ̸= 1 that umn|m′n′ = 0,
and by Hermiticity this follows also from m′ ̸= 1. For m = m′ = 1, however,
we have
u1n|1n′ =
∞
!
m=1
umn|mn′ = ¨un|n′
Consequently, as was asserted, the solution umn|m′n is determined uniquely.
We can thus summarize our result as follows: A statistical ensemble in
I+II with operator U = {umn|m′n′} is determined uniquely by the statistical
ensembles in I and II individually, with respective operators ˙U = { ˙um|m′} and
¨U = {¨un|n′}, if and only if the following two conditions are satisﬁed:
1.
umn|m′n′ = ˙vm|m′ · ¨vn|n′
From TrU = '
m,n umn|mn = '
m ˙vm|m·'
n ¨vn|n = 1 it follows that
if we multiply ˙vm|m and ¨vn|n by appropriate reciprocal factors we
can obtain
∞
!
m=1
˙vm|m = 1,
∞
!
n=1
¨vn|n = 1
But then we see that ˙um|m′ = ˙vm|m′, ¨un|n′ = ¨vn|n′.
2. Either
˙vm|m′ = xmxm′
or
¨vn|n′ = xnxn′
Indeed, ˙U = P[φ] means that φ = '
m ymφm and therefore
˙um|m′ = ymym′
Correspondinglyfor ˙vm|m′. Byanalogy,the sameistruewith ¨U=P[ξ ].
We shall call ˙U and ¨U the projections of U in I and II respectively.212
We now apply ourselves to the states of I+II: U = P[Φ]. The corresponding
wave functions Φ(q, r) can be expanded in the complete orthonormal set
Φmn(q, r) = φm(q)ξn(r):
Φ(q, r) =
∞
!
m,n=1
fmnφm(q)ξn(r)
212 As will emerge, the projections of a state in I+II are in general mixtures
in I or II. This circumstance was discovered by Landau, Z. Physik 45 (1927).


2. Composite Systems
We can therefore replace them by the coeﬃcients fmn (m, n = 1, 2, . . .) which
are subject only to the condition that '
m,n |fmn|2 = ∥Φ∥2 be ﬁnite.
We now deﬁne two operators F, F∗by
F
F φ(q) =
(
Φ(q, r) φ(q)dq
F∗ξ(r) =
(
Φ(q, r) ξ(r)dr
These are linear, but have the peculiarity of being deﬁned in RI and RII
respectively while taking on values from RII and RI respectively. Their relation
is that of adjoints, since obviously (Fφ, ξ) = (φ, F∗ξ) (the inner product on the
left is to be formed in RII, while that on the right is to be formed in RI). Since
the diﬀerence between RI and RII is mathematically unimportant, we can apply
the results of II.11: then, since we are dealing with integral operators, Σ(F) and
Σ(F∗) are both equal to
((
|Φ(q, r)|2dqdr = ∥Φ∥2 = 1
(∥Φ∥in RI+II!), and are therefore ﬁnite. Consequently F, F∗are continuous—in
fact, are completely continuous—operators, and F∗F as well as FF∗are deﬁnite
operators: Tr(F∗F) = Σ(F) = 1, Tr(FF∗) = Σ(F∗) = 1.
If we again consider the diﬀerence between RI and RII we see that F∗F is
deﬁned and assumes values in RI, FF∗is deﬁned and assumes values in RII.
Since
Fφm(q) =
∞
!
n=1
f mnξn(r)
F has the matrix {f mn}, as is discovered by use of the complete orthonormal sets
φm(q) and ξn(r) (note that the latter is a complete orthonormal set along with
ξn(r)). Likewise, F∗has the matrix {fmn} (obtained with the aid of the same
complete orthonormal systems). Therefore (using the complete orthonormal set
φm(q) in RI)
F∗F
has the matrix
& ∞
!
n=1
f mnfm′n
)
and (using the complete orthonormal set ξn(r) in RII)
FF∗
has the matrix
&
∞
!
m=1
f mnfmn′
)
On the other hand (using the complete orthonormal set Φmn(q, r) = φm(q)ξn(r)
in RI+II), U = P[Φ] has the matrix {f mnfm′n′}, so that ˙U and ¨U—its projections
in RI and RII—have the matrices
& ∞
!
n=1
f mnfm′n
)
and
&
∞
!
m=1
f mnfmn′
)


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
respectively (with the complete orthonormal sets given above).213 Consequently
U
˙U = F∗F,
¨U = FF∗
Note that the deﬁnitions F and the equations U make no use of φm, ξn, so
hold independently of any particular basis selections.
The operators ˙U and ¨U are completely continuous, and by II.11 and IV.3
they can be written in the form
˙U =
∞
!
k=1
wk
′ P[ψk],
¨U =
∞
!
k=1
wk
′′ P[ηk]
in which the ψk comprise a complete orthonormal set in RI, the ηk one in
RII, and all wk
′, wk
′′ ⩾0. We now neglect the terms in the preceding formulas
with wk
′ = 0 or wk
′′ = 0 respectively, and re-number the remaining terms with
k = 1, 2, . . . .
Then the ψk and ηk again form orthonormal—but now not
necessarily complete—sets; the sums
M′
!
k=1
and
M′′
!
k=1
appear now in place of
∞
!
k=1
where M ′, M ′′ can be either ∞of ﬁnite. Also, all wk
′, wk
′′ are now > 0.
Let us now consider a ψk. ˙Uψk = wk
′ψk and therefore F∗Fψk = wk
′ψk which
gives FF∗Fψk = wk
′Fψk whence ¨UFψk = wk
′Fψk, Furthermore
(Fψk, Fψℓ) = (F∗Fψk, ψℓ) = ( ˙Uψk, ψℓ)
= wk
′(ψk, ψℓ)
=
#
wk
′
for
k = ℓ
for
k ̸= ℓ
Therefore, in particular, ∥Fψk∥= wk
′. The
√
wk
′ Fψk then form an orthonormal
set in RII and they are eigenfunctions of ¨U, with the same eigenvalues as the
ψk have for ˙U (i.e., wk
′ ). That is, each eigenvalue of ˙U is an eigenvalue also
of ¨U, with at least the same multiplicity. Interchanging ˙U and ¨U shows that
same eigenvalues have in fact the same multiplicities. The wk
′ and wk
′′ therefore
coincide except for their order. Hence M ′ = M ′′ = M, and by re-enumeration
of the wk
′′ we obtain wk
′ = wk
′′ = wk. This done, we can then clearly choose
ηk =
√wk
Fψk
in general. Then
√wk
F∗ηk =
wk
F∗Fψk =
wk
˙Uψk = ψk
213 The preceding mathematical discussion is based on a paper by E. Schmidt,
Math. Ann. 83 (1907).


2. Composite Systems
Therefore212
V
ηk =
√wk
Fψk
ψk =
√wk
F∗ηk
Let us now extend the orthonormal set ψ1, ψ2, . . . to a complete orthonormal
set ψ1, ψ2, . . . , ψ1′, ψ2′, . . . and likewise the η1, η2, . . . to a complete orthonormal
set η1, η2, . . . , η1′, η2′, . . . where each of the two sets ψ1′, ψ2′, . . . and η1′, η2′, . . .
can be empty, ﬁnite or inﬁnite, and each can be selected independently of
the other. As previously remarked, F and U make no reference to any speciﬁc
orthonormal bases.
We are free therefore to use V, as well as the above
constructions, to determine the selection of the complete orthonormal sets
φ1, φ2, . . . and ξ1, ξ2, . . . . Speciﬁcally, we let these coincide with the
ψ1, ψ2, . . . , ψ1
′, ψ2
′, . . .
and
η1, η2, . . . η1
′, η2
′, . . .
respectively: let ψk correspond to φµk and ηk to ξνk (k = 1, 2, . . . : µ1, µ2, . . .
diﬀerent from one another, and ν1, ν2, . . . likewise). Then
Fφµk = √wk ξνk
Fφm = 0
for
m ̸= µ1, µ2, . . .
Therefore
fmn =
& √wk
for
m = µk, n = νk, k = 1, 2, . . .
otherwise
or equivalently
Φ(q, r) =
M
!
k=1
√wk φµk(q) ξνk(r)
By suitable choice of the complete orthonormal sets φm(q) and ξn(r) we
have thus established that each column of the matrix {fmn} contains at most
one non-zero element (that this is real and > 0, namely √wk , is unimportant for
what follows). What is the physical meaning of this mathematical statement?
Let A be an operator with eigenfunctions φ1, φ2, . . . and with only distinct
eigenvalues (say a1, a2, . . .), and likewise, let B have eigenfunctions ξ1, ξ2, . . . and
distinct eigenvalues b1, b2, . . . . A corresponds to a physical quantity in I, B
to one in II. They are therefore simultaneously measurable. It is easily seen
that the statement “A has the value am and B has the value bn” determines
the state Φmn(q, r) = φm(q) ξn(r), and that if the composite system I+II is
in state Φ this occurs with probability (P[Φmn]Φ, Φ) = |(Φ, Φmn)|2 = |fmn|2.
Consequently, our statement means that A, B are simultaneously measurable,
and that if one of them is measured in Φ then the other is uniquely determined
by it. (An am with all fmn = 0 cannot result, because its total probability
'∞
n=1 |fmn|2 cannot be 0; if am is ever observed then for exactly one n is


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
fmn ̸= 0; likewise for bn.) There may be several possible A-values in the state Φ
(namely, those am for which
∞
!
n−1
|fmn|2 > 0
i.e., for which there exists an n with fmn ̸= 0—usually all am are such), and an
equal number of possible B-values (those bn for which there exists an m with
fmn ̸= 0), but Φ establishes a one-to-one correspondence between the possible
A-values and the possible B-values.
If we call the possible m values µ1, µ2, . . . and the corresponding possible
n values ν1, ν2, . . . then
fmn =
& ck ̸= 0
for
m = µk, n = νk, k = 1, 2, . . .
otherwise
and therefore (whether M be ﬁnite or ∞)
Φ(q, r) =
M
!
k=1
ckφµk(q) ξνk(r)
hence
˙umm′ =
∞
!
n=1
f mnfm′n =
#
|ck|2
for
m=m′ =µk, k = 1, 2, . . .
otherwise
¨unn′ =
∞
!
m=1
f mnfmn′ =
#
|ck|2
for
n = n′ = νk, k = 1, 2, . . .
otherwise
from which we obtain ﬁnally
˙U =
M
!
k=1
|ck|2P[φµk]
¨U =
M
!
k=1
|ck|2P[ξνk]
Hence, when Φ is projected in I or II it in general becomes a mixture, though it
is a pure state in I+II. Indeed, it provides certain information regarding I+II
which cannot be made use of in I alone or in II alone; namely, the one-to-one
correspondence between A-values and B-values.
For each Φ we can therefore choose A, B—i.e., the φm and the ξn—such
that our condition is satisﬁed; for arbitrary A, B it may, of course, be violated.
Each state Φ then establishes a particular relation between I and II, while the
related quantities A, B depend upon Φ. How far Φ determines them—i.e., the
φm and the ξn—is not diﬃcult to answer. If all |ck| are diﬀerent and non-zero,


3. Discussion of the Measuring Process
then ˙U, ¨U (which are determined by Φ) determine the respective φm, ξn uniquely
(see IV.3). The general discussion is left to the reader.
Finally, let us mention the fact that for M ̸= 1 neither ˙U nor ¨U is a state
(because several |ck|2 > 0), while for M = 1 both are: ˙U = P[φµ1], ¨U = P[ξν1].
Then Φ(q, r) = c1φµ1(q) ξν1(r). We can absorb the c1 into φµk. In short: ˙U, ¨U
are states if and only if Φ(q, r) has the form φ(q)ξ(r), in which case ˙U = P[φ]
and ¨U = P[ξ] respectively.
On the basis of the above results, we in summary note: If I is in the state
φ(q) and II in the state ξ(r), then I+II is in the state Φ(q, r) = φ(q) · ξ(r). If,
on the other hand, I+II is in a state Φ(q, r) which is not a product φ(q) · ξ(r)
then I and II are mixtures and not states, but Φ establishes a one-to-one
correspondence between the possible values of certain quantities in I and II.
3. DISCUSSION OF THE MEASURING PROCESS
Before we complete the discussion of the measuring process in the sense of
the ideas developed in VI.1 (with the aid of the formal tools developed in VI.2) we
shall make use of the results of VI.2 to exclude an explanation often proposed to
account for the statistical character of the process 1 (see again V.1). This rests
on the following idea: Let I be the observed system, and II the observer. If I is
in the state ˙U = P[φ] before the measurement, while II on the other hand is in
a mixture
¨U =
∞
!
n−1
wnP[ξn]
then I+II is a uniquely determined mixture U which we can easily calculate
from VI.2:
U =
∞
!
n−1
wnP[Φn]
where
Φn(q, r) = φ(q)ξn(r)
If now a measurement takes place in I, then this is to be regarded as a dynamical
interaction of I and II; i.e., as a process 2 (see V.1) with an energy operator H.
If the process has a time duration t then
U →U′ = e−i
ℏtHUe
i
ℏtH
where in fact
=
∞
!
n=1
wkP[Φ(t)
n ]
where
Φ(t)
n = e−i
ℏtHΦn
Now if each Φ(t)
n (q, r) were of the form ψn(q)ηn(r), where the ψn are the
eigenfunctions of A and the ηn any complete orthonormal set, then this
intervention would have the character of a measurement.
For it transforms
each state φ of I into a mixture of the eigenfunctions of A.
The statistical
character of the result would then arise in this way: Before the measurement,


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
I was in a (unique) state, but II was a mixture, and that mixture has, in the
course of the interaction, associated itself with I+II. And, in particular, it has
made a mixture of their projection in I. But the result of such a measurement is
indeterminate because the initial state of the observer (before the measurement)
is not known exactly. It is conceivable that such a mechanism might function,
because the information available to the observer regarding his own state could
have absolute limitations, by the laws of nature. These limitations would be
expressed in the values of the wn, which are characteristic of the observer alone
(and therefore independent of φ).
It is at this point that the attempted explanation breaks down.
For
quantum mechanics requires that wn = (P[ψn]φ, φ) = |(φ, ψn)|2; i.e., wn is
dependent on φ! There might exist another decomposition
U′ =
∞
!
n=1
wn
′P[Φn
′ ]
(the Φn′ = ψn(q)ηn(r) are orthonormal) but this is of no use either, because the
wn′ are (except for order), determined uniquely by U′ (IV.3), and are therefore
equal to the wn.214
Therefore, the non-causal nature of the process 1 cannot be attributed to
incomplete knowledge of the state of the observer, and we will therefore assume
in all that follows that the state of the observer is completely known.
Let us now apply ourselves again to the problem formulated at the end of
VI.1. I, II and III shall have the meanings given there, and for the quantum
mechanical investigation of I, II we shall use the notation of VI.2, while III
remains outside of the calculations (see the discussion of this in VI.1). Let A
be the quantity (in I) actually to be measured, represented by the operator A
with eigenfunctions φ1(q), φ2(q), . . . . Let I be in the state φ(q).
If I is the observed system, and II+III the observer, then we must apply
process I and expect to ﬁnd that the measurement transforms I from the state
φ to one of the states φn (n = 1, 2, . . .). Now, what mode of description must
we adopt if I+II is taken to be the observed system, and only III the observer?
In this case we must say that II is a measuring instrument which shows on
a scale the value of A (in I): the position of the pointer on this scale is a physical
quantity B (in II), which is actually observed by III. (If II is already within the
body of the observer we have the corresponding physiological concepts in place
of the scale and pointer; e.g., retina and image on the retina, etc.) Let A have
the values a1, a2, . . . , B have the values b1, b2, . . . , and let the numbering be
such that an is associated with bn.
214 This approach admits of still more variants, all of which must be rejected
for similar reasons.


3. Discussion of the Measuring Process
Initially, I is in the (unknown) state φ(q) and II in the (known) state ξ(r),
so I+II is in the state Φ(q, r) = φ(q) · ξ(r). The measurement (so far as it is
performed by II on I) is, as in the earlier example, carried out by an energy
operator H (in I+II) in time t: this is the process 2 which transforms
Φ −→Φ ′ = e−i
ℏtHΦ
Viewed by the observer III, one has a measurement only if the following is
the case: If III were to measure (by process 1) the simultaneously measurable
quantities A, B (in I or II respectively, or both in I+II) then the pair of values
am, bn would have probability 0 for m ̸= n and probability wn for m = n.
That is, it suﬃces “to look at” II, whereupon A will have been measured in I.
Quantum mechanics imposes the requirement that wn = |(φ, φn)|2.
If this is established then the measuring process, so far as it occurs in II, is
“explained” theoretically; i.e., the division I | II+III discussed in VI.1 has been
shifted to I+II | III.
The mathematical problem is then the following: A complete orthonormal
set φ1, φ2, . . . is given in I. We seek such a set ξ1, ξ2, . . . in RII, and a state ξ in
RII, and an energy operator H in RI+II, and a time t such that the following
holds: If φ is an arbitrary state in RI and
Φ ′(q, r) = e−i
ℏtH Φ(q, r)
with
Φ(q, r) = φ(q)ξ(r)
then Φ ′ has necessarily the form
Φ ′(q, r) =
∞
!
n=1
cnφn(q)ξn(r)
(where the ck are naturally dependent upon φ). Therefore |cm|2 = |(φ, φm)|2.
That the latter is equivalent to the physical requirement formulated above was
discussed in VI.2.
In the following we shall use a ﬁxed set ξ1, ξ2, . . . and a ﬁxed ξ along with
the ﬁxed φ1, φ2, . . . and shall investigate the unitary operator
∆= e−i
ℏtH
instead of H.
This mathematical problem leads us back to a problem solved in VI.2. There
a quantity corresponding to our present Φ ′ was given, and we established the
existence of cn, φn, ξn. Now φn, ξn are ﬁxed, Φ and cn dependent upon φ are
given, and we seek to establish the existence of a ∆such that Φ ′ = ∆Φ gives
back these cn, φn, ξn.
We shall show that such a determination of ∆is indeed possible. In this
case, only the principle is of importance to us; i.e., the existence of such a


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
∆. The further question—whether the unitary operators ∆corresponding to
simple and plausible measuring arrangements also have this property—will not
concern us. We have, as it happens, already seen that our requirements coincide
with those enlisted in a plausible iterative approach to the measurement process.
The arrangements in question are to possess the characteristics of measurement;
quantum mechanics would be in blatant contradiction with experience if these
∆did not satisfy our requirements (at least approximately).215 In the following
we will be content to exhibit an abstract ∆—one which in fact satisﬁes our
requirements exactly.
Let the φm (m = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .) and the ξn (n = 0, ±1, ±2, . . .) be two
given complete orthonormal sets in RI and RII respectively. (It is simply as
a fundamentally irrelevant technical convenience that our indices run now on
0, ±1, ±2, . . . , rather than on 1, 2, . . . .) Let the state ξ be, for simplicity, ξ0.
We deﬁne the operator ∆by its action:
∆·
∞
!
m,n=−∞
xmnφm(q)ξn(r) =
∞
!
m,n=−∞
xmnφm(q)ξm+n(r)
Since the φm(q)ξn(r) and the φm(q)ξm+n(r) are both complete orthonormal
sets in RI+II, this ∆is unitary. Now
φ(q) =
∞
!
m=−∞
(φ, φm) · φm(q),
ξ(r) = ξ0(r)
so
Φ(q, r) = φ(q)ξ(r) =
∞
!
m=−∞
(φ, φm) · φm(q)ξ0(r)
and therefore
Φ ′(q, r) = ∆Φ(q, r) =
∞
!
m=−∞
(φ, φm) · φm(q)ξm(r)
Our purpose is thus accomplished [though in this abstract discussion the
structure of tH=iℏln ∆remainsunaddressed]. We have in addition cm=(φ, φm).
A better overall view of the mechanism of this process can be obtained if
we exemplify it by concrete Schr¨odinger wave functions, and give H in place of ∆.
The observed object, as well as the observer (i.e., I and II respectively)
will be characterized by single variables q and r respectively, both running
continuously from −∞to +∞. That is, let both be thought of as points that
can move along the line. Their wave functions have then the form ψ(q) and
η(r) respectively. We will assume that their masses m1 and m2 are so large
215 The corresponding calculation for the case of the position measurement
discussed in III.4 is contained in a paper by Weizs¨acker, Z. Physik 70 (1931).


3. Discussion of the Measuring Process
that the kinetic term
T =
m1 ˙P
2 +
m2 ¨P
2 =
m1 ( ℏ
i
∂
∂q)2 +
m2 ( ℏ
i
∂
∂r)2
in the composite energy operator H = T + Vinteraction can be neglected, and
to the interaction term—which is decisive for the measurement—assign the
particular form
Vinteraction = 1τ ˙Q ¨P = 1τ q( ℏ
i
∂
∂r)
where τ is a constant with the dimensions of time. Schr¨odinger’s time-dependent
diﬀerential equation (for the I+II wave functions ψt = ψt(q, r)) then reads
1τ q( ℏ
i
∂
∂r)ψt(q, r) = iℏ∂
∂tψt(q, r)
or
!
τ ∂
∂t + q ∂
∂r
"
ψt(q, r) = 0
of which the general [unnormalized] solution has the form
ψt(q, r) = f(q, r −1τ qt)
If, at t = 0, we have ψ0(q, r) = Φ(q, r) then we have f(q, r) = Φ(q, r) and
therefore
ψt(q, r) = Φ(q, r −1τ qt)
In particular, if the initial states of I and II are represented by φ(q) and
ξ(r) respectively, then in the sense of our calculational scheme (if the time
t appearing therein is chosen to be τ)
Φ(q, r) = φ(q)ξ(r)
Φ ′(q, r) = ψτ(q, r) = φ(q)ξ(r −q)
We wish now to show that this can be used by II for a position measurement
of I; i.e., that the coordinates are tied to each other. (Since q, r have continuous
spectra they are measurable with only arbitrary precision, so this can be
accomplished only approximately.)
For this purpose we will assume that ξ(r) diﬀers from 0 only in a very
small interval −ϵ < r < +ϵ (i.e., that the coordinate of the observer before the
measurement is very accurately known); additionally, ξ(r) should, of course, be
normalized:
∥ξ∥= 1;
i.e.,
#
|ξ(r)|2dr = 1
The probability that [at time τ] q lies in the interval [q0 ± δ ] and r in the
interval [r0 ± δ ′ ] is
# q0+δ
q0−δ
# r0+δ′
r0−δ′ |Φ ′(q, r)|2dqdr =
# q0+δ
q0−δ
# r0+δ′
r0−δ′ |φ(q)|2|ξ(r −q)|2dqdr


Chapter VI: The Measuring Process
Because of the assumption imposed upon ξ(r), this vanishes if q0 and r0 diﬀer
by more than δ + δ ′ + ϵ, which is to say: q, r are so closely tied to each other
that their diﬀerence can never be greater than δ + δ ′ + ϵ. And for r0 = q0 this
becomes
# q0+δ
q0−δ
|φ(q)|2dq
if we choose δ ′ ⩾δ + ϵ. Since we can choose δ, δ ′, ϵ to be arbitrarily small (they
must, however, be greater than zero) this means that q, r are tied together
with arbitrary closeness, and the probability density has the value stipulated
by quantum mechanics: |φ(q)|2.
That is, the properties of measurements, as we have discussed them in VI.1
and in this section, are realized.
The discussion of more complicated examples—of (say) an analog of the
four-term example discussed in VI.1, or of the control that a second observer III
might eﬀect upon the measurement of I by II—can also be carried out in this
fashion. But that will be left to the reader.


NAME INDEX
abraham, m.[–]
becker, r.[–]
bernoulli, j.[–]
birkhoff, g.[–]
269, 299
bohr, n.[–]
5, 8, 11, 13, 20, 138, 140, 150, 153, 164, 165
186, 190, 191, 202, 231, 273, 291, 292, 299, 300
boltzmann, l.[–]
235, 257, 258, 260, 269, 291, 292
born, m.[–]
1, 6, 7, 13, 128, 136, 154, 293, 295, 300
bose, s.[–]
179, 235, 291
bothe, w.[–]
carath´eodory, c.[–]
carleman, t.[–]
72, 74
cauchy,a.[–]
32, 35, 36, 42, 46, 56, 105, 291, 295
cayley,a.[–]
99, 101, 104–107, 291
compton, a.[–]
137, 138, 156, 218, 262, 291, 300
courant, r.[–]
17, 69, 88, 167, 172, 189, 302
davisson, c.[–]
184, 291, 300
dirac, p.[–]
1, 2, 6, 8, 13, 19, 20, 22, 82, 128, 164
179, 191, 235, 291, 291, 296, 300
doppler, c.[–]
157, 262, 292
ehrenfest, p.[–]
235, 269
ehrenfest, t.[–]
235, 269
einstein, a.[–]
5, 155, 164, 176, 177, 179, 183, 184
191, 234, 235, 291, 292, 300
fermi, e.[–]
235, 237, 292, 300
fischer, e.[–]
22, 295
fredholm, e.[–]
frenkel, y.[–]
germer, l.[–]
184, 291,300
gibbs, j.[–]
235, 292
gordon, w.[–]
22, 300
goudsmit, s.[–]
6, 295
hausdorff, f.[–]
32, 48
heisenberg, w.[–]
6, 7, 150, 153, 154, 164, 191, 231
273, 293, 296, 300
hellinger, e.[–]
1, 21, 84, 125, 300
hertz, h.[–]


Name Index
hilbert, d.[–]
1, 2, 17, 21–40, 42–44, 46, 48, 50, 52, 54
56–70, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80, 82, 84, 86, 88–90, 92–94
96–98, 100, 102, 104, 106, 108 –110, 112, 114, 116
118, 120 –122, 124, 126–128, 143, 167, 172–174, 179
181, 189, 207, 210, 234, 252, 274, 293, 294, 300, 302
jordan, p.[–]
1, 2, 6, 7, 13, 20, 128, 140, 293, 296, 300
kamke, e.[–]
kennard, e.[–]
150, 300
kramers, h.[–]
138, 299
landau, l.[–]
177, 211, 278, 300, 301
land´e, a.[–]
lesbegue, h.[–]
18, 40, 41, 43, 44, 46, 82, 114, 293
london, f.[–]
2, 301
maxwell, j.[–]
166, 169, 184, 235, 236, 240, 241, 292, 293
mittag-leffler, g.[–]
86, 301
moore, e.[–]
nernst, w.[–]
pauli, w.[–]
peano, g.[–]
114, 294
peierls, r.[–]
177, 301
perron, o.[–]
plancherel, m.[–]
86, 301
planck, m.[–]
5, 8, 234, 237, 255, 291, 294
reiche, f.[–]
riesz, f.[–]
1, 22, 92, 295
robertson, h.[–]
1, 150
schmidt, e.[–]
1, 38, 108, 264, 280, 295, 301
schr¨odinger, e.[–]
6, 7, 11–13, 20–22, 58, 60, 63, 67, 68, 127
128, 135, 140, 152, 164, 184, 213, 229, 238, 301
286, 287, 292, 294, 295
schwarz, k.[–]
65, 150
slater, j.[–]
138, 299
sommerfeld, a.[–]
1, 6, 269, 294
stieltjes, t.[–]
72–74, 76, 78, 91, 102, 132, 140, 197, 295
stone, m.[–]
93, 301
szilard, l.[–]
234, 235, 240, 241, 260, 273, 292, 301
titchmarsh, e.[–]
86, 301
toeplitz, o.[–]
1, 21, 96, 111, 125, 301
uhlenbeck, g.[–]
6, 295
von neumann, j.[–]
67, 91, 92, 111, 211, 296, 301, 302
von mises, r.[–]
,
weisskopf, v.[–]
185, 302
weyl, h.[–]
1, 26, 84, 164, 172, 187, 211, 302
wigner, e.[–]
185, 261, 302
wintner, a.[–]
100, 302


SUBJECT INDEX
acausality and thermodynamics
atomic nucleus: quantum theory requires new ideas
blackbody radiation (Planck)
Bohr atom
5, 8
Boltzmann’s constant
Boltzmann entropy
Boltzmann H-theorem
Boltzmann’s theorem
Bose-Einstein statistics
179, 235
boundary conditions, periodic
bounded function (of elements of a linear manifold)
Brownian motion
canonical ensemble
Cauchy criterion for convergence
causal vs statistical
135, 211, 271
causality in modern physics
Cayley transformation
center of gravity of a diﬀusing gas
classical elecrodynamics
closed linear manifold, deﬁned
33, II.4, 68
commutative projection operators
53, 54
commutation relations, fundamental
8, 23
complete linear manifold, deﬁned
complete orthogonal set
12, 32
composite systems
VI.2
Compton-Simon experiment
137, 218
Compton eﬀect
156, 262
convergence of projection operators
corpuscular nature of light (Einstein)
5, 6, 175
correspondence principle
Davison-Germer experiment
Dirac δ-function, a convenient ﬁction
18–20
Dirac formalism criticized
2, 82
Dirac theory of radiation
8, 164, 191
dimension (of a linear manifold)


Subject Index
disorder assumptions
dispersion
149, 197, 199, 263
distance (between elements of a linear manifold)
Doppler eﬀect
157, 262
duality, fundamental to quantum theory
“ego”
eigenvalue problem
11, 15, II.6, II.7
eigenvalue problem, solvability
104, 106, 108
Einstein relations for light quanta
155, 176
Einstein-Bohr energy-frequency conditions
energy
energy never a macroscopic observable
ensembles
195–197
dispersion-free
200, 201, 204, 208, 210
equilibrium, properties of
homogeneous (or pure)
201, 204, 210
entropy and information
entropy of an ensemble
235, 247
Gibbs’ method
Einstein’s method
Maxwell-Boltzmann method
entropy, macroscopic
268, 269
ergodic theorem, classical/quantum
equivalence of matrix & wave theories
13, I.3
Euclidean geometry
Euclidean space
everywhere dense linear manifolds, deﬁned
expectation values, additivity of
145, 201, 202
expectation values for mixtures
Fermi-Dirac statistics
figure 1, ﬁrst uncertainty model
figure 2, second (reﬁned) uncertainty model
figure 3, quantum analog of a Szilard engine
figure 4, a more elaborate quantum Szilard engine
Fourier transform
functionals
Gibbs’ paradox, quantum resolution
Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics
Hamiltonian, classical
Hamiltonian, quantum: non-commutivity ⇒ambiguity
9, 11
Hamiltonian, time-dependent quantum
Hermitian operators
1, 62
Hermitian symmetry
“hidden parameters”
2, 136, 198
“hidden parameters cannot exist”
hydrogen atom (Schr¨odinger)


Subject Index
Hilbert space
1, 24, II
Hilbert theory of operators
ideal gas
indistinguishability
improper functions
2, 20
inner product
integral equations
integral operator, kernel
17, 61
interaction picture
intervention
continuous causal vs abrupt acausal
229, 233
reversible vs irreversible
never decreases entropy
irreversibility of measurement process
Jeans’ theorem
kinetic theory of gases
Kronecker delta
Lagrange multipliers
law of large numbers
5, 136, 196, 213
law of mass action
laws of nature not causal
laws of thermodynamics
Lebesgue integral
18, 40, 41
limit point
linear space
linear independence
linear manifold
linear oscillator
macroscopic indecomposability
magnitude (of an element of a linear manifold)
matrix mechanics (Heisenberg, Born, Jordan)
7–10, 11
matrix calculus, non-commutative
Maxwell’s demon
Maxwell distribution
Maxwell equations
measurement
an explicit model
as system-instrument interactions
changes the state (projectively)
140, 198, 222
exact measurement not always possible
inexact
macroscopic: resolution of a paradox
V.4
not entropy-diminishing
248, 252
simultaneous
simultaneous of conjugate variables (imprecise)
III.4, 261
simultaneous measurement, when impossible


Subject Index
mixtures
214–217
mixture of given energy and maximal entropy
multiply periodic quantum orbits (Epstein-Sommerfeld)
Newtonian mechanics
non-denumerability of the continuum
observer/instrument/system:
distinction fundamentally ambiguous
272, 273, 284
operators in Hilbert space
II.5
operators
adjoint
bounded
closed
67, 93, 95
commutative
II.10, 66
commutative, modiﬁed deﬁnition
completely continuous
convergence
coordinate & momentum
deﬁnite
62, 109, 119, 274
discontinuous
domain
extension
formal rules of calculation
90, 146
Hermitian
50, 62
hypermaximal
108, 119, 133, 161, 205, 274
integral
61, 124
maximal
98, 105
non-commuting
ordering problem
self-adjoint
totally continuous
111, 121
unbounded
unitary
orthogonality of linear manifolds
orthogonal projection operators
54, 55
partial trace (tacitly introduced)
partition function
Peano curve
perturbation theory (Schr¨odinger)
phase space
physical quantities vs states
Planck’s constant h = 2πℏ
“principle of suﬃcient cause” abandoned by nature
probabilities, a priori
probabilities, a posteriori
projection, concept introduced
projection hypothesis


Subject Index
projection operators
propositions (2-valued physical properties)
III.5, 160, 261, 264
as projections
and mixtures
logical calculus of
psycho-physical parallelism
272, 273
quantum jumps
140, 175
quantum mechanics might possibly be false
quantum states
only a theoretical construction
quantum statistics
III
addition theorem for probabilities
basic statistical assumption
130, 133
expectation value (pure state)
statistical interpretation (Born)
radiative interaction, atom & quantized ﬁeld
III.6
emergence of light quantum concept
intensity of absorption
188, 190
intensity of emission (induced, spontaneous)
188, 191
interaction term
170, 176, 180, 183
Hamiltonian (atom + ﬁeld + interaction)
171, 175, 183
passage to interaction picture (eﬀectively)
relativity: not yet consistent with quantum theory
6, 231
relative probabilities
202, 208
resolution of the identity
76, 90
Riesz-Fischer theorem
rules for constructing physical operators
Schmidt orthogonalization
38, 264
Schr¨odinger formalism
Schwarz inequality (Cauchy-Schwarz), proof
separable linear manifold, deﬁned
semi-permeable walls (membranes)
239, 266
simultaneous decidability of propositions
simultaneous measurability
III.3, 144
speciﬁc heat
spectrum, continuous vs discrete
68, 74, 80, 114, 143
spectral multiplicity
spin (Goudsmit-Uhlenbeck)
Stieltjes integral
72, 91, 102, 132
states, stationary
8, 11
states, of minimal dispersion
statistical interpretation (Born)
statistical operator (density operator/matrix)
anticipated
introduced
Stirling formula


Subject Index
subjective perception
theorem 1
theorem 2
theorem 3(n)
theorem 3(∞)
theorem 4
theorem 5
theorem 6
theorem 7 (α,β,γ)
theorem 8
theorem 9
theorem 10
theorem 11
theorem 12
theorem 13
theorem 14
theorem 15
theorem 16
theorem 17
theorem 18
theorem 19
theory of measurement, objective of
thermodynamics: foundations clariﬁed
thermodynamic probability
257, 260
time a parameter—not an operator—in quantum theory
trace
3, II.11
basic properties
116, 120
careless mathematics/doubtful artiﬁces
117, 125
transposition operator
transformation theory (Dirac-Jordan)
1, 6
transition probabilities
8, 164
absorption, emission, spontaneous emission
uncertainty relations
III.4, 199
and classical experience
explanatory physical models
154–158
for conjugate observables
150–152
for time-energy
Heisenberg’s discovery
vacuum state
vector calculus: grad, div, curl, Laplacian
wave equation
wave mechanics (Schr¨odinger)
6, 10–13
wave-particle duality
5, 183


LOCATIONS OF FLAGGED PROPOSITIONS
Although von Neumann did not number his equations, he did attach identifying
ﬂags—sometimes arbitrarily, sometimes with mnemonic intent—to principles,
deﬁning properties, conditions, rules and equations of special signiﬁcance. Flags
which pertained only to immediate arguments were sometimes used again to
identify diﬀerent propositions in subsequent portions of the text. Those with
mnemonic intent were adjusted by Beyer to onform to the translated mnemonic.
Here follows a sequential list of the pages on which those ﬂags appear:
E1
E2
E3
I
∆1,∆2,∆3
∆4
α,β,γ
A
B
C(n), C(∞)
D
E
E
D
O
S1, S2, S3
S1, S2, S3
∆
Co, Co1, Co2
S1, S2, S3
C
∗
P
E1, E2
F
U
Eq


Flagged Propositions
U′
L
F
α,β,γ,δ,ϵ,η,θ,ζ
A
A1, A2
E
M1
Dis1
M2
α,β
A, B, C, D
E
A′, B′
M3
α′,β ′
Dis2
I,II
Tr
E2
M
α′
T1, T2, T1′, T2′
1, 2
F
U
V


ARTICLES CITED
To cite sources in the periodical literature, von Neumann employed a convention
rendered so terse by the systematic omission of page numbers and article titles
as to become ambiguous when several articles by the same author appear in the
same volume. Those citations are spelled out here in searchable detail. Article
titles (when not originally in English) are presented here in English translation.
The following abbreviations (which occasionally depart from those adopted in
the text) are employed in the following list:
Ann. Phys. = Annalen der Physik
Ann. Math. = Annals of Mathematics
Circ. Math. di Pal. = Rendiconti del Circolo di Mathematico di Palermo
G¨ott. Nachr. = Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften zu G¨ottingen
J. f¨ur Reine Math. = Journal f¨ur reine und angewandte Mathematik
Lond. Math. Soc. Proc. = Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society
Math. Ann. = Mathematische Annalen
Math. Z. = Mathematische Zeitschrift
Naturwiss. = Naturwissenschaften
Proc. Roy. Soc. London = Proceedings of the Royal Society of London
Phil. Mag. = Philosophical Magazine
PNAS = Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
Phys. Rev. = Physical Review
Phys. Z. = Physikalische Zeitschrift
Verh. d. Physik. Ges. = Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalische
Gesellschaft
Z. Phys. = Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik
birkhoff (1931): “Proof of the ergodic theorem,” PNAS 17, 656–660
birkoff & koopman (1932): “Recent contributions to ergodic theory,”
PNAS 18, 279–282
bohr (1913): “On the constitution of atoms and molecules,”
Phil. Mag. 26, 1–25
bohr (1920): “On the question of the polarization of radiation in the quantum
theory,” Z. Phys. 6, 1–9
bohr, kramers & slater (1924): “The quantum theory of radiation,”
Z. Phys. 24, 69–87


Articles Cited: Details
bohr (1928): “The quantum postulate and recent developments in atomism,”
Naturwiss. 16, 245–257
bohr (1929): “The quantum of action and the description of nature,”
Naturwiss. 17, 483–486
born (1926): “Quantum mechanics of collision processes,”
Z. Phys. 37, 863–867
compton & simon (1925): “Directed quanta of scattered X-rays”
Phys. Rev. 26, 289–299
davison & Germer (1928): “Diﬀraction of electrons by a crystal of nickel,”
Phys. Rev. 30, 705–740
dirac (1925): “The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics,”
Proc. Roy. Soc. London 109, 642–653
dirac (1927): “The physical interpretation of quantum mechanics,”
Proc. Roy. Soc. London 113, 621–641
dirac (1927): “The quantum theory of the electron,”
Proc. Roy. Soc. London 117, 610–624
einstein (1905): “On the motion of particles suspended in stationary liquids
required by the molecular theory of heat,” Ann. Phys. 14, 549–560
einstein (1905): “On a heuristic viewpoint concerning the production and
transformation of light,” Ann. Phys. 17, 132–148
einstein (1914): “Contributions to quantum theory,” Verh. d. Physik. Ges.
16, 820–828
einstein (1917): “On the quantum theory of radiation,”
Phys. Z. 18, 121–128
fermi (1926): “The quantization of ideal single atom gases,”
Z. Phys. 36, 902-912
gordon (1928): “The energy levels of the hydrogen atom according to Dirac’s
quantum theory of the electron,” Z. Phys. 48, 11–14
heisenberg (1927): “The actual content of quantum theoretical kinematics
and mechanics,” Z. Phys. 43, 172–198
heilliger (1909): “Contributions to the theory of quadratic forms in inﬁnitely
many variables,” J. f¨ur Reine Math. 136, 210–271
hilbert(1906): “Guidelines for a general theory of linear integral equations.
Part four,” G¨ott. Nachr., 157–227
kennard (1927): “The quantum mechanics of simple types of motion,”
Z. Phys. 443, 326–352
jordan (1927): “A new foundation for quantum mechanics,”
Z. Phys. 40, 809–838
landau (1927): “The damping problem in wave mechanics,”
Z. Phys. 45, 430


Articles Cited: Details
landau & peierls (1930): “Quantum electrodynamics in conﬁguration space,”
Z. Phys. 62, 188–200
london (1926): “Angle variables and canonical variables in wave mechanics,”
Z. Phys. 40, 193–210
plancherel & mittag-leffler (1910): “Contribution to the study of the
representation of an arbitrary function by deﬁnite integrals,”
Circ. Math. di Pal. 30, 289–335
rupp (1928): “On the angular distribution of slow electrons in passage through
metallic layers,” Ann. Phys. 85, 981–1012
schmidt (1907): “On the theory of linear and nonlinear integral equations,”
Math. Ann. 63, 433–476
schr¨odinger (1926a): “Quantization as an eigenvalue problem. I,”
Ann. Phys. 79, 361–376
schr¨odinger (1926b): “Quantization as an eigenvalue problem. II,”
Ann. Phys. 79, 489–527
schr¨odinger (1926c): “Quantization as an eigenvalue problem. III,”
Ann. Phys. 80, 437–490
schr¨odinger (1926d): “Quantization as an eigenvalue problem. IV,”
Ann. Phys. 81, 109–139
schr¨odinger (1929): “What is a law of nature?” Naturwiss. 17, 9–11
stone (1929a): “Linear transformations in Hilbert space. I.
Geometrical aspects,” PNAS 15, 198–200
stone (1929b): “Linear transformations in Hilbert space. II.
Analytical aspects,” PNAS 15, 423–425
stone (1930): “Linear transformations in Hilbert space. III.
Operational methods and group theory,” PNAS 16, 172–175
szilard (1925): “On the extension of phenomenological thermodynamics to
ﬂuctuation phenomena,” Z. Phys. 32, 753–788
szilard (1929): “On the decrease of entropy in a thermodynamic system by
the intervention of intelligent beings,” Z. Phys. 53, 840–856
titchmarsh (1924): “Weber’s integral theorem,”
Lond. Math. Soc. Proc. 24, 15–28
thomson (1928): “Experiments on the diﬀraction of cathode rays,”
Proc. Roy. Soc. London 117, 600–609
toeplitz (1911): “On the theory of quadratic and bilinear forms in inﬁnitely
many variables,” Math. Ann. 69, 351–376
von neumann (1927): “Mathematical basis of quantum mechanics,”
G¨ott. Nachr., 1–57
von neumann (1929a): “General eigenvalue theory of Hermitian functional
operators,” Math. Ann. 102, 49–131


Articles Cited: Details
von neumann (1929b): “Proof of the ergodic theorem and the H-theorem in
the new mechanics,” Z. Phys. 57, 30–70
von neumann (1931): “On functions of functional operators,”
Ann. Math. 32, 191–226
von neumann (1932): “Physical applications of the ergodic hypothesis,”
PNAS 18, 263–266
von weizs¨acker (1931): “Localization of an electron through a microscope,”
Z. Phys. 70, 114–130
weisskopf & wigner (1930): “Calculation of natural linewidth based on
Dirac’s theory of light,” Z. Phys. 63, 54–73
weyl (1910): “Ordinary diﬀerential equations with singularities and the
associated developments in arbitrary functions,” Math. Ann. 68, 220–269
weyl (1927): “Quantum mechanics and group theory,” Z. Phys. 47, 1–46
wintner (1929): “On the theory of constrained bilinear forms,”
Math. Z. 30, 228–281
At several points, von Neumann cites speciﬁc passages in Courant & Hilbert’s
Methoden der Mathematischen Physik (1931). Readers will be familiar with
the substantially revised English translation of that classic work, which was
published as Methods of Mathematical Physics (MMP) in 1953. Here follows
indication of where (if at all) the passages cited by von Neumann are to be
found in MMP:
Note 30, page 17
Note 71, page 69
Note 89, page 88





: MMP Chapter II, “Linear Integral Equations”
Note 140, page 167 :





MMP ChapterVI, “Application of the Calculus
of Variations to Eigenvalue Problems,” especially
§4. “The maximum-minimum property of eigenvalues”
Page 172 :
(
MMP page 328, equations (48) & (49)
MMP page 92,
equations (31) & (32)
)
Hermite polynomials
Note 152, page 189 : Omitted in MMP from discussion of Fourier series


LOCATIONS OF THE FOOTNOTES
Von Neumann’s notes (displayed originally as endnotes, but here as footnotes)
refer fairly frequently to previous notes, which themselves refer occasionally to
still earlier notes. It is to reduce the tedium of tracing such references to their
root that the following index has been constructed.
note
page
note
page
note
page


Locations of the Footnotes
note
page
note
page
note
page


