Method in the Physical Sciences 

JOHN VON NEUMANN 

Professor of Mathematics 
Institute of Advanced Studies 

Emphasis on methodology seems most often to arise when there are 
symptoms of trouble, when a realization of difficulties makes necessary 
a re-examination of some position inherited from the past. Because 
traditional attitudes in the sciences seem to have been firmer and more 
self-assured than in other disciplines, there has perhaps been less 
searching of the scientist’s conscience and, therefore, less concern with 
methodology on his part. Yet he has not been without concern, for 
there have been within the experience of people now living at least 
three serious crises—or reverberations of earlier crises—which have 
caused him to reorientate his thinking. We can use these crises as pro¬ 
totypes for reference, and we can calibrate our statements with their 
help. 

There have been two such crises in physics—namely, the conceptual 
soul-searching connected with the discovery of relativity and the con¬ 
ceptual difficulties connected with discoveries in quantum theory. In 
the case of relativity, the crisis was brief but violent. The second per¬ 
sisted over a longer period, during the almost thirty years in which the 
quantum theory took shape. The third crisis was in mathematics. It 
was a very serious conceptual crisis, dealing with rigor and the proper 
way to carry out a correct mathematical proof. In view of earlier 
notions of the absolute rigor of mathematics, it is surprising that such 
a thing could have happened, and even more surprising that it could 
have happened in these latter days when miracles are not supposed to 
take place. Yet it did happen. 

Concerning the crisis in mathematics, Hermann Weyl, who had a 






THE UNITY OF KNOWLEDGE 


much more direct part in it, can speak with more authority than I. 
Therefore my discussion will be limited to the two crises in physics— 
and on these I shall be less specific about conceptual revisions because 
Niels Bohr has already touched upon this subject in his essay. I will 
further limit myself to saying a few things about procedure and method 
which will illustrate the general character of method in science. Not 
only for the sake of argument but also because I really believe it, I 
shall defend the thesis that the method in question is primarily oppor¬ 
tunistic—also that outside the sciences, few people appreciate how 
utterly opportunistic it is. 

I 

To begin, we must emphasize a statement which I am sure you 
have heard before, but which must be repeated again and again. It is 
that the sciences do not try to explain, they hardly even try to inter¬ 
pret, they mainly make models. By a model is meant a mathematical 
construct which, with the addition of certain verbal interpretations, 
describes observed phenomena. The justification of such a mathe¬ 
matical construct is solely and precisely that it is expected to work 
that is, correctly to describe phenomena from a reasonably wide area. 
Furthermore, it must satisfy certain esthetic criteria—that is, in rela¬ 
tion to how much it describes, it must be rather simple. I think it is 
worth while insisting on these vague terms—for instance, on the use of 
the word rather. One cannot tell exactly how “simple” simple is. Some 
of the theories that we have adopted, some of the models with which 
we are very happy and of which we are very proud would probably not 
impress someone exposed to them for the first time as being particu¬ 
larly simple. 

Simplicity is largely a matter of historical background, of previous 
conditioning, of antecedents, of customary procedures, and it is very 
much a function of what is explained by it. If the amount of materi 
which is unambiguously explained—that is, explained with no add 
interpretations or commentaries—is extremely extensive, if it is also 
very heterogeneous, if one has clearly explained a large number o 
things in very different areas, then one will accept a good deal of 
complication and a good deal of deviation from stylistic beauty. If> 
the other hand, only relatively little has been explained, one will abso¬ 
lutely insist that it should at least be done by very simple and direct 
means. It must also be said that the criterion, that a lot should be ex¬ 
plained, has to be applied with a good deal of sophistication. Indeed, 



THE METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE 




some of the nuances of all these requirements can probably only be 
appreciated intuitively. 

The ability to describe—or to predict—correctly is important in such 
a model, but it need not be decisive per se. Also, in scientific predic¬ 
tion it does not matter enormously whether prediction occurs before 
or after the fact. Of course, it must be correct. However, as I men¬ 
tioned above, it is considered very important that the material which 
has been correctly described or predicted should be heterogeneous. 
Let me analyze this requirement in somewhat more detail. 

If possible, the confirmation should not all stem from one area 
alone. In this sense, it is considered particularly significant to find con¬ 
firmations in areas which were not in the mind of anyone who invented 
the theory. Thus, if you discover that the theory, which was necessi¬ 
tated by difficulties in one area, describes things correctly in entirely 
different areas, this is highly significant. It is even more important, if 
things have not been previously very harmonious in these latter areas 
and there was no sense of optimism about them. 

In this regard, the enormous authority of quantum mechanics is 
typical. It was probably strongly conditioned by the fact that quantum 
mechanics came into being because of various difficulties in spec¬ 
troscopy and of various other problems of atoms and molecules 
which are variously connected with spectroscopy, but that it was then 
suddenly found capable of describing or predicting correctly various 
things in chemistry, in solid-state physics, and even to have some bear¬ 
ing on epistemology. These were hardly on anyone’s mind at the be¬ 
ginning. 

Similar considerations apply to Newtonian mechanics and its still 
more monumental degree of authority. The latter is largely due to the 
fact that the Newtonian system was introduced in order to describe the 
behavior of the sun’s planets. It then turned out that it also described, 
with only small and perfectly plausible additions, many things in ex¬ 
tensive areas in very varied parts of physics. 

There are also other aspects of the matter which must be kept in 
mind. It is important that the phenomena which are correctly de¬ 
scribed should vary considerably, not only qualitatively, but also in 
their quantitative aspects. Thus it is one of the most impressive traits 
of Newtonian theory, the classical theory of gravity, that it explains 
phenomena on the human scale as well as on the planetary scale. And 
many outside the sciences are not aware of how limited are the scales 
on which theories usually work. The ratio of the linear sizes of the 





THE UNITY OF KNOWLEDGE 


largest and the smallest objects that have figured in physical theory— 
the hypothesized universe on the one hand and the smallest particles 
on the other—is about 10 40 . In other words, all our physical experi¬ 
ence, no matter how recondite, is covered in its linear scale by 40 
powers of 10. This amounts to 133 powers of 2—133 octaves. No 
theory to date has had something valid to say all along the scale. Any 
theory which can make statements referring to widely separated por¬ 


tions of the scale 


enjoys very great authority, even if the statements are 


quite weak. For the Newtonian system, confirmation was developed 


over 25, or possibly 30 powers of 10 along this scale. For most other 


existing theories, the area of confirmation in this sense is still more 


restricted. 


n 

In evaluating what these models do, one should also emphasize how 
little of directly interpretive element need be attached to them. In this 
respect, it is instructive to look at a classical example. In other areas, 
even in some which are within science—for instance, biology—it is, or 
was, considered very important to which one of two major types the 
view that one takes of the area belongs. Specifically, whether the view 
is causal or teleological. In using the word causal, I do not have the 
contrast of causal and statistical in mind, but the other contrast of 
causal and teleological. Causal means that if you know the state of the 
system now, then you can use this knowledge to predict its state im¬ 
mediately thereafter. Immediately means a very short time; the predic¬ 
tion may not be exact for any finite time, but the shorter the time, the 
more exact it gets, and that at an accelerated pace, so that it can be 
extended by the usual process of integration. Thus, one can extend 
such a prediction by successive steps to any point in the future with any 
desired degree of precision. Hence, complete knowledge of the system 
now permits one to calculate unambiguously everything about it at 
any time in the future. In most causal systems one can also proceed 

similarly to any time in the past. 

This is one of the major ways of looking at nature. Classical New- 
toman mechanics is usually quoted as the archetype of this kind of 
insight and procedure. Under this dispensation, if you know the state 
of a system now, you can calculate what it will be at any moment 
thereafter and also, usually at any moment before. One has to be care¬ 
ful, however, in defining the concept of a state. The state is s P ecl “ e “ 
if one has a complete description. However, one must consider that 



THE METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE 




this is to a certain degree begging the principle, since by a complete 
description one means one which comprises precisely as much infor¬ 
mation as is needed in order to perform the causal progression to the 
future. 

In classical mechanics one knows how much information such a 
complete description must contain. One has to know, not only where all 
parts of the system are (all coordinates), but also how rapidly these 
are moving (all velocities). Then classical mechanics permits calcu¬ 
lations of what positions and velocities it will have at any later time. 
One needs precisely these positions and these velocities. Nothing less 
will do, and there is no need for other things that might, a priori, seem 
equally important, like accelerations. The reason why a state in classi¬ 
cal mechanics is described by specifying position and velocity, and not 
position alone, or not position and velocity and certain accelerations, 
is of course that the Newtonian system is closed just at this point. It is 
just this amount of information, position plus velocity, which is 
hereditary in that theory and which can be propagated into the future 
by unambiguous calculations. 

Another aspect is the teleological one. Here one has to take a whole 
expanse of the history of the system, between two moments which are 
definitely apart in time, for example, between now and an hour from 
now, or between now and a trillionth of a second from now, or now 
and a millennium from now. Taking such a finite stretch of history as 
the subject of inquiry, a teleological theory asserts that this entire his¬ 
torical process must satisfy certain criteria which are usually stated in 
terms of optimizing (maximizing) a suitable function of the process. 
The use of the word optimizing again illustrates the opportunism that 
even reflects itself in the terminology. By optimizing one only means 
that one makes some quantity as large as possible. Whether that quan¬ 
tity is particularly desirable or not does not matter. By changing its 
sign one could transform the criterion in making it as small as pos¬ 
sible. Thus, optimizing, maximizing, and minimizing are all neutral 
mathematical terms, to be substituted for each other on the basis of 
mathematical convenience and taste. 

At any rate, by a single optimization, that is, a single maximization, 
the total history between two points in time is determined. The real 
course of events turns out to be that one for which the particular quan¬ 
tity referred to above is made as large as possible. In other words, one 
develops a complete historical evolution in a single act, by a single 
insertion between the known points at the beginning and at the end. It 





THE UNITY OF KNOWLEDGE 


is not developed stepwise, progressing from the beginning forward in 
time, as it would be in a causal theory. 

This contrast is very well known from biology. It is also familiar in 
a number of fields increasingly removed from science. It is usually con¬ 
sidered as a very fundamental contrast: the causal and the teleological 
procedures are viewed as mutually exclusive, as highly antithetical 
ways of explaining phenomena. It is therefore very important and very 
characteristic that in science there need not be any meaningful differ¬ 
ence between these two descriptions. Indeed, in classical mechanics 
there are two absolutely equivalent ways to state the same theory, and 
one of them is causal and the other one is teleological. Both describe 
the same thing, Newtonian mechanics. Newton’s description is causal 
and d’Alembert’s description is teleological. This has been known for 
well over two hundred years. All the difference between the two is a 
purely mathematical transformation. In principle such a transforma¬ 
tion is no more profound than choosing to say four instead of saying 
two times two. In other words, by purely mathematical manipulation 
one can show that each of these two ways gives exactly the same results 

as the other. 

Thus whether one chooses to say that classical mechanics is causal 
or teleological is purely a matter of literary inclination at the moment 
of talking. This is very important, since it proves, that if one has really 
technically penetrated a subject, things that previously seemed in com¬ 
plete contrast, might be purely mathematical transformations of each 
other. Things which appear to represent deep differences of principle 
and of interpretation, in this way may turn out not to affect any sig¬ 
nificant statements and any predictions. They mean nothing to the con¬ 
tent of the theory. 

Thus we have an example where alternative interpretations of the 
same theory are possible, but where the question of whether one uses 
one or the other is decided in a manner quite different from what is 
generally believed to be the valid way. Indeed, the criterion is one o 

mathematical convenience or taste. tn 

There is also another example where this is the case, but only P 
a certain point: beyond that point serious, substantively relevant dif¬ 
ferences of interpretation arise. The example is quantum mechanics. 1 
will limit myself to that part of the theory which refers to the electron^ 
shells of the atoms. For these a theory is known which seems to 



THE METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE 




entirely satisfactory at present. This theory can be described in two 
different ways which differ quite importantly, somewhat in the manner 
of the causal and teleological interpretations of Newtonian mechanics 
discussed above, though the difference in this case is not quite as strik¬ 
ing and profound as there. The two descriptions are, first, the original 
procedure of Erwin Schrodinger which describes this part of quantum 
mechanics by an analogue with optics, and second, the method of 
Werner Heisenberg which describes this area in completely probabi¬ 
listic terms. 

Since these descriptions were first formulated, a great deal of work 
has been done on both and they have been further elaborated. In the 
process it was demonstrated that they are mathematically equivalent. 
The prevalent taste is today, and has been for more than twenty years, 
rather in favor of one of the two interpretations, namely, the statistical 
one. (It must be said, however, that there have been in the last few 
years some interesting attempts to revive the other interpretation.) It 
was, moreover, quite clear all along, that ultimately the motive for 
choosing one or the other attitude would be connected with the fact 
that quantum mechanics, in spite of all its successes, is contiguous with 
areas in which the theory is not satisfactory, specifically, with the 
quantum theory of electrodynamics and subsequently with the quan¬ 
tum theory of particles like mesons and their successors. 

About all of these we know a great deal less than about the original 
area of quantum mechanics, and we are here in the midst of grave 
difficulties. The reason for preferring one version of quantum theory 
over the other has usually been the intuitive hope that one or the other 
would give better heuristic guidance in extending the theory into those 
areas which are not yet properly explained or not yet properly the- 
oreticized and controlled. Throughout the last twenty years this has 
been prevalently believed to be a matter of finding correct formal 
extensions of the existing theory. If this ultimately proves to be the case, 
it will determine the final choice. Questions of form, even when the 
mathematical contexts are equivalent, can therefore have great heu¬ 
ristic and guiding importance, and in the end determine the outcome. 

There have been some individual exceptions to this rule. Some 
physicists certainly had definite subjective preferences for one de¬ 
scription or the other. However, there can be hardly any doubt that 
scientific “public opinion” in the end will only accept that variant 
which succeeds in pointing the way to explaining wider areas with 
greater power. In other words, while there appears to be a serious 





THE UNITY OF KNOWLEDGE 


philosophical controversy between the interpretations of Schrodinger 
and Heisenberg, it is quite likely that the controversy will be settled in 
quite an unphilosophical way. The decision is likely to be opportu¬ 
nistic in the end. The theory that lends itself better to formalistic ex¬ 
tension towards valid new theories will overcome the other, no matter 
what our preference up to that point might have been. It must be 
emphasized that this is not a question of accepting the correct theory 
and rejecting the false one. It is a matter of accepting that theory which 
shows greater formal adaptability for a correct extension. This is a 
formalistic, esthetic criterion, with a highly opportunistic flavor.
