EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

Von  Neumann's  Work  on  Computers   1 

Von  Neumann  the  Mathematician   2 

Von  Neumann  and  Computing   2 

Logical  Design  of  Computers   6 

Programming  and  Flow  Diagrams   12 

Computer  Circuits   15 

Von  Neumann's  Theory  of  Automata   17 

Introduction   17 

Natural  and  Artificial  Automata   21 

Mathematics  of  Automata  Theory   25 

PART  ONE 

THEORY  AND  ORGANIZATION  OF  COMPLICATED 
AUTOMATA 

First  Lecture:  Computing  Machines  in  General   31 

Second  Lecture:  Rigorous  Theories  of  Control  and  Information.  .  42 

Third  Lecture:  Statistical  Theories  of  Information   57 

Fourth  Lecture:  The  Role  of  High  and  of  Extremely  High 

Complication   64 

Fifth  Lecture:  Re-evaluation  of  the  Problems  of  Complicated 

Automata — Problems  of  Hierarchy  and  Evolution   74 


PART  TWO 

THE  THEORY  OF  AUTOMATA:  CONSTRUCTION, 
REPRODUCTION,  HOMOGENEITY 


CHAPTER  1 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 

1.1  Introduction   91 

1.1.1.1  The  theory  of  automata   91 

1.1.1.2  The  constructive  method  and  its  limitations   91 

1.1.2.1  The  main  questions:  (A)-(E)   92 

1.1.2.2  The  nature  of  the  answers  to  be  obtained   92 


V 


Vi  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

[1.1.2.3  Von  Neumann's  models  of  self -reproduction]   93 

1.2  The  Role  of  Logics— Question  (A)   99 

1.2.1  The  logical  operations — neurons   99 

1.2.2  Neural  vs.  muscular  functions   101 

1.3  The  Basic  Problems  of  Construction — Question  (B)   101 

1.3.1.1  The  immediate  treatment,   involving  geometry, 

kinematics,  etc   101 

1.3.1.2  The  non-geometrical  treatment — structure  of  the 

vacuum   102 

1.3.2    Stationarity — quiescent  vs.  active  states   103 

1.3.3.1  Discrete  vs.  continuous  framework   103 

1.3.3.2  Homogeneity:  discrete  (crystalline)  and  continuous 

(Euclidean)   103 

1.3.3.3  Questions  of  structure:  (P)-(R)   104 

1.3.3.4  Nature  of  results,  crystalline  vs.  Euclidean:  state- 

ments (X)-(Z)   105 

[1.3.3.5  Homogeneity,  quiescence,  and  self -reproduction] .  .  106 

1.3.4.1  Simplification  of  the  problems  of  construction  by 

the  treatment  according  to  Section  1.3.1.2   108 

1.3.4.2  Quiescence  vs.  activity;  excitability  vs.  unexcita- 

bility;  ordinary  and  special  stimuli   109 

1.3.4.3  Critique  of  the  distinctions  of  Section  1.3.4.2.  .  .  .  110 

1.4  General  Construction  Schemes — Question  (B)  Continued.  .  Ill 

1.4.1.1  Construction  of  cell  aggregates — the  built-in  plan.  .  Ill 

1.4.1.2  The  three  schemes  for  building  in  multiple  plans — 

the  parametric  form   112 

1.4.2.1  The  descriptive  statement  L  for  numerical  param- 

eters  112 

1.4.2.2  Applications  of  L   113 

1.4.2.3  Use  of  L  as  an  unlimited  memory  for  (A)   113 

1.4.2.4  Use  of  base  two  for  L   114 

[1.4.2.5  The  linear  array  L]   114 

1.5  Universal  Construction  Schemes — Question  (C)   116 

1.5.1  Use  of  L  for  non-numerical  (universal)  parametri- 

zation   116 

1.5.2  The  universal  type  of  plan   116 

1.6  Self-Reproduction — Question  (D)   118 

1.6.1.1  The  apparent  difficulty  of  using  L  in  the  case  of 

self -reproduction   118 

1.6.1.2  Circumvention   of   the   difficulty — the   types  E 

andEF   118 

1.6.2.1  First  remark:  shape  of  L   119 


CONTENTS  vii 

1.6.2.2  Second  remark:  avoidance  of  collision  in  a  single 

reproduction   120 

1.6.2.3  Third  remark:  analysis  of  the  method  for  overcom- 

ing the  difficulty  of  Section  1.6.1.1 — the  role 

of  L.  .   121 

1.6.3.1  Copying:  use  of  descriptions  vs.  originals   122 

[1.6.3.2  The  Richard  paradox  and  Turing  machines]   123 

1.7  Various  Problems  of  External  Construction  Intermediate 

Between  Questions  (D)  and  (E)   126 

1.7.1     Positioning  of  primary,  secondary,  ternary,  etc   126 

1.7.2.1  Constructed  automata:  initial  state  and  starting 

stimulus   127 

1.7.2.2  Single-action  vs.  sequential  self-reproduction   128 

1.7.3     Construction,  position,  conflict   129 

1.7.4.1  EF  and  the  gene-function   130 

1.7.4.2  EF  and  the  mutation — types  of  mutation   130 

1.8  Evolution— Question  (E)   131 

CHAPTER  2 

A  SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  GENERAL 
TRANSITION  RULE 

2.1  Introduction   132 

2.1.1  The  model:  states  and  the  transition  rule   132 

2.1.2  Formalization  of  the  spatial  and  the  temporal  rela- 

tions  132 

2.1.3  Need  for  a  pre-formalistic  discussion  of  the  states.  .  134 

2.2  Logical  Functions — Ordinary  Transmission  States   134 

2.2.1     Logical-neuronal  functions   134 

2.2.2.1  Transmission  states — connecting  lines   135 

2.2.2.2  Delays,  corners,  and  turns  in  connecting  lines.  .  .  .  136 

2.3  Neurons— Confluent  States   136 

2.3.1  The  +  neuron   136 

2.3.2  Confluent  states:  the  •  neuron   136 

2.3.3  The  -  neuron   138 

2.3.4  The  split   138 

2.4  Growth  Functions:  Unexcitable  State  and  Special  Transmis- 

sion States   139 

2.4.1  Muscular  or  growth  function — ordinary  vs.  special 

stimuli   139 

2.4.2  Unexcitable  state   139 

2.4.3  Direct  and  reverse  processes — special  transmission 

states   140 


Vlll 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


2.5  The  Reverse  Process   140 

2.5.1.1  The  reverse  process  for  the  ordinary  states   140 

2.5.1.2  The  reverse  process  for  the  special  states   141 

2.5.2     Origination  of  special  stimuli   141 

2.6  The  Direct  Process — Sensitized  States   142 

2.6.1     The  direct  process   142 

2.6.2.1  First  remark:  duality  of  ordinary  and  special 

states   142 

2.6.2.2  The  need  for  the  reverse  process   143 

2.6.3.1  Second  remark:  the  need  for  fixed  stimulus  se- 

quences to  control  the  direct  process   143 

2.6.3.2  Additional  states  required   145 

2.6.4    Sensitized  states   145 

2.7  Even  and  Odd  Delays   146 

2.7.1     Even  delays  by  path  differences   146 

2.7.2.1  Odd  delays  and  single  delays   146 

2.7.2.2  Single  delays  through  the  confluent  states   147 

2.8  Summary   148 

2.8.1  Rigorous  description  of  the  states  and  of  the  transi- 

tion rule   148 

2.8.2  Verbal  summary   150 

[2.8.3     Illustrations  of  the  transition  rule]   151 

chapter  3 
DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 

3.1  Introduction   157 

3.1.1  Free  and  rigid  timing,  periodic  repetition,  and 

phase  stop   157 

3.1.2  Construction  of  organs,  simple  and  composite   158 

3.2  Pulsers   159 

3.2.1  The  pulser:  structure,  dimensions,  and  timing.  .  .  .  159 

3.2.2  The  periodic  pulser:  structure,  dimensions,  timing, 

and  the  PP(T)  form   162 

3.3  The  Decoding  Organ:  Structure,  Dimensions,  and  Timing.  .  175 

3.4  The  Triple-return  Counter   179 

3.5  The  I  vs.  10101  Discriminator:  Structure,  Dimensions,  and 

Timing   187 

3.6  The  Coded  Channel   190 

3.6.1  Structure,  dimensions,  and  timing  of  the  coded 

channel   190 

3.6.2  Cyclicity  in  the  coded  channel   198 


CONTENTS  ix 
CHAPTER  4 

DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 

4.1  Introduction   201 

[4.1.1    Abstract]   201 

4.1.2  The  linear  array  L   202 

4.1.3  The  constructing  unit  CU  and  the  memory  con- 

trol MC   204 

4.1.4  Restatement  of  the  postulates  concerning  the  con- 

structing unit  CU  and  the  memory  control  MC .  .  207 

4.1.5  The  modus  operandi  of  the  memory  control  MC  on 

the  linear  array  L   207 

4.1.6  The  connecting  loop  Ci   210 

4.1.7  The  timing  loop  C2   213 

4.2  Lengthening  and  Shortening  Loops  Ci  and  C2,  and  Writing 

in  the  Linear  Array  L   214 

4.2.1  Moving  the  connection  on  L   214 

4.2.2  Lengthening  on  L   216 

4.2.3  Shortening  on  L   220 

4.2.4  Altering  xn  in  L   224 

4.3  The  Memory  Control  MC   226 

[4.3.1     The  organization  and  operation  of  MC]   226 

4.3.2  Detailed  discussion  of  the  functioning  of  MC.  .  .  .  231 

4.3.3  The  read-write-erase  unit  RWE   237 

4.3.4  The  basic  control  organ  CO  in  MC   243 

4.3.5  The  read-write-erase  control  RWEC   246 

CHAPTER  5 

[AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION] 

[5.1  Completion  of  the  Memory  Control  MC   251 

5.1.1  The  rest  of  the  manuscript   251 

5.1.2  Solution  of  the  interference  problem   259 

5.1.3  Logical  universality  of  the  cellular  structure   265 

5.2  The  Universal  Constructor  CU  +  (MC  +  L)   271 

5.2.1  The  constructing  arm   271 

5.2.2  Redesign  of  the  memory  control  MC   277 

5.2.3  The  constructing  unit  CU   279 

5.3  Conclusion   286 

5.3.1  Summary  of  the  present  work   286 

5.3.2  Self -reproducing  automata]   294 


X 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Bibliography   297 

Figures   305 

Symbol  Index   379 

Author  and  Subject  Index   381 

TABLES 

[Table  I.     External  characteristics  of  periodic  pulsers]   173 

Table  II.  Summary  of  the  pulse  sequences  sent  into  loops  Ci 

and  C2   235 

Table  III.  Summary  of  excess  delay  requirements  for  the  peri- 
odic pulsers  stimulating  loops  Ci  and  C2   236 

Table  IV.  The  pulsers  used  to  stimulate  loops  Ci  and  C2   237 

[Table  V.  How  the  control  organs  of  RWEC  control  the  pul- 
sers and  periodic  pulsers  of  RWE]   248 

LIST  OF  FIGURES 

Second  Lecture 

Fig.  1.    Neural  network  in  which  dominance  is  not  transitive  .  . .  305 

Fifth  Lecture 

Fig.  2.    A  binary  tape  constructed  from  rigid  elements   306 

Chapter  1 

Fig.  3.    The  basic  neurons   306 

Chapter  2 

Fig.  4.    The  quadratic  lattice   307 

(a)  Nearest  (O)  and  next  nearest  (  • )  neighbors  of  X 

(b)  Unit  vectors 

(c)  Nearest  (O)  and  next  nearest  (  • )  neighbors  of  X 

Fig.  5.    Ordinary  transmission  states   308 

Fig.  6.    Confluent  states   310 

(a)  Achievement  of  a  •  neuron  by  using  confluent  states 

(b)  Achievement  of  a  split  line  by  using  confluent  states 

Fig.  7.    Organization  of  an  area   311 

Fig.  8.    The  need  for  both  even  and  odd  delays   311 

Fig.  9.    The  29  states  and  their  transition  rule   312 


LIST  OF  FIGURES  xi 

Fig.  10.  Succession  of  states  in  the  direct  process   313 

Fig.  11.  Illustrations  of  transmission  and  confluent  states   314 

(a)  Realization  of  f(i  +  3)  =  [a(i)  +  b(t  +  1)] 

(b)  Realization  of  g(t  +  3)  =  [c(t)  •  d(t)] 

(c)  Conversion  of  ordinary  stimuli  into  special  stimuli  by 

confluent  states,  and  wire-branching 

Fig.  12.  Illustration  of  the  direct  process   315 

Fig.  13.  Examples  of  the  reverse  process   316 

(a)  Special  transmission  state  killing  a  confluent  state 

(b)  Special  and  ordinary  transmission  states  killing  each 

other 

(c)  Killing  dominates  reception  but  not  emission 

Fig.  14.  Procedure  for  modifying  a  remote  cell  and  returning  the 

constructing  path  to  its  original  unexcitable  state.  ...  317 

Chapter  8 

Fig.  15.  Two  pulsers   318 

Fig.  16.  Design  of  a  pulser   319 

Fig.  17.  Two  periodic  pulsers   321 

(a)  Periodic  pulser  PP(10010001) 

(b)  Special  periodic  pulser  PP(1) 

Fig.  18.  Design  of  a  periodic  pulser:  initial  construction  322 

Fig.  19.  Design  of  a  periodic  pulser:  equalization  of  delays  325 

Fig.  20.  Alternate  periodic  pulser  PP(1)   329 

Fig.  21.  Decoding  organ  D(100100001)   329 

Fig.  22.  Design  of  a  decoder   330 

Fig.  23.  Triple-return  counter  3>   332 

Fig.  24.  Design  of  triple-return  counter  <J>   333 

Fig.  25.  1  vs  10101  discriminator  ^   335 

Fig.  26.  Recognizer  R(101001)   335 

Fig.  27.  A  coded  channel   336 

Fig.  28.  Arranging  inputs  and  outputs  of  a  coded  channel   337 

Fig.  29.  Pulsers  and  decoders  of  a  coded  channel   340 

Fig.  30.  Cyclicity  in  a  coded  channel   341 

Chapter  4 

Fig.  31.  The  linear  array  L,  the  connecting  loop  Q,  and  the  timing 

loopC2   342 

Fig.  32.  Lengthening  the  timing  loop  C2   345 

Fig.  33.  Lengthening  the  connecting  loop  Q   346 

Fig.  34.  Shortening  the  timing  loop  C2   348 


xii 


THEORY  OF  SELF- REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Fig.  35.  Shortening  the  connecting  loop  d   350 

Fig.  36.  Writing  "zero"  in  cell  xn  of  the  linear  array  L  when 

lengthening  Ci   352 

Fig.  37.  Tape  unit  with  unlimited  memory  capacity   353 

Fig.  38.  The  logical  structure  of  the  procedure  followed  by  the 

memory  control  MC   354 

Fig.  39.  Read-write-erase  unit  RWE  (Note:  parts  (a)  and  (b) 

constitute  one  continuous  drawing   355 

(a)  Upper  part  of  RWE 

(b)  Lower  part  of  RWE 

Fig.  40.  Control  organ  CO   357 

Fig.  41.  Read-write-erase  control  RWEC  (Note:  parts  (a)-(f) 

constitute  one  continuous  drawing.)   358 


(a)  Control  organs  for  lengthening  C2  (COi  and  C02)  and 

for  lengthening  the  lower  part  of  Ci  (C03  and  C04) 

(b)  PP(1)  to  store  the  fact  that  a  "zero"  is  to  be  written 

in  xn  ,  and  control  organs  for  writing  a  zero  and  length- 
ening the  upper  part  of  Ci 

(c)  PP(1)  to  store  the  fact  that  a  "one"  is  to  be  written  in 

xn  ,  and  control  organs  for  leaving  a  one  in  cell  xn  and 
lengthening  the  upper  part  of  Ci 

(d)  Control  organs  for  shortening  C2 

(e)  Control  organs  and  PP(1)  for  shortening  the  lower  part 

of  Ci  and  writing  in  cell  xn 

(f)  Control  organs  for  shortening  the  upper  part  of  G 


Chapter  5 

Fig.  42.  Crossing  organ   364 

(a)  Crossing  organ 

(b)  Initial  state  of  clock 

Fig.  43.  State  organ  SO  of  a  finite  automaton  FA   365 

Fig.  44.  Constructing  arm   366 

Fig.  45.  Horizontal  advance  of  constructing  arm   366 

Fig.  46.  Vertical  advance  of  constructing  arm   367 

Fig.  47.  Horizontal  retreat  of  constructing  arm  with  construction 

of  7  and  8   368 

Fig.  48.  Vertical  retreat  of  constructing  arm  with  construction 

of  7  and  8   369 

Fig.  49.  Injection  of  starting  stimulus  into  the  secondary  autom- 
aton  370 

Fig.  50.  Operation  of  the  constructing  arm   371 


LIST  OF  FIGURES  xiii 

Fig.  51.  New  method  of  operating  the  linear  array  L   372 

Fig.  52.  Writing  "one"  in  cell  xn  and  lengthening  the  reading 

loop   373 

Fig.  53.  Static-dynamic  converter   374 

Fig.  54.  The  universal  constructor  Mc*   375 

Fig.  55.  Self-reproduction   376 


Fig.  56.  Self -reproduction  of  a  universal  computer-constructor.  .  377 


PREFACE 


In  the  late  1940's  John  von  Neumann  began  to  develop  a  theory 
of  automata.  He  envisaged  a  systematic  theory  which  would  be 
mathematical  and  logical  in  form  and  which  would  contribute  in  an 
essential  way  to  our  understanding  of  natural  systems  (natural  auto- 
mata) as  well  as  to  our  understanding  of  both  analog  and  digital 
computers  (artificial  automata). 

To  this  end  von  Neumann  produced  five  works,  in  the  following 
order: 

(1)  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata."  Read  at  the 
Hixon  Symposium  in  September,  1948;  published  in  1951.  Col- 
lected Works  5.288-328.1 

(2)  "Theory  and  Organization  of  Complicated  Automata."  Five 
lectures  delivered  at  the  University  of  Illinois  in  December, 
1949.  This  is  Part  I  of  the  present  volume. 

(3)  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms 
from  Unreliable  Components."  Lectures  given  at  the  California 
Institute  of  Technology  in  January,  1952.  Collected  Works  5.329- 
378. 

(4)  "The  Theory  of  Automata:  Construction,  Reproduction,  Ho- 
mogeneity." Von  Neumann  started  this  manuscript  in  the  fall 
of  1952  and  continued  working  on  it  for  about  a  year.  This  is 
Part  II  of  the  present  volume. 

(5)  The  Computer  and  the  Brain.  Written  during  1955  and  1956; 
published  in  1958. 

The  second  and  fourth  of  these  were  left  at  his  death  in  a  manuscript 
form  which  required  extensive  editing.  As  edited  they  constitute  the 
two  parts  of  the  present  volume,  which  thus  concludes  von  Neu- 
mann's work  on  the  theory  of  automata. 

As  a  background  for  this  editorial  work  I  made  a  study  of  all  of 
von  Neumann's  contributions  on  computers,  including  the  theory  of 
automata.  I  have  summarized  his  contributions  in  the  "Introduction" 
to  the  present  volume. 

Von  Neumann  was  especially  interested  in  complicated  automata, 
such  as  the  human  nervous  system  and  the  tremendously  large  com- 

1  Complete  references  are  given  in  the  bibliography.  "Collected  Works  5.288- 
328"  refers  to  pp.  288-328  of  Vol.  V  of  von  Neumann's  Collected  Works. 


xv 


Xvi  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

puters  he  foresaw  for  the  future.  He  wanted  a  theory  of  the  logical 
organization  of  complicated  systems  of  computing  elements  and  be- 
lieved that  such  a  theory  was  an  essential  prerequisite  to  constructing 
very  large  computers.  The  two  problems  in  automata  theory  that 
von  Neumann  concentrated  on  are  both  intimately  related  to  com- 
plexity. These  are  the  problems  of  reliability  and  self-reproduction. 
The  reliability  of  components  limits  the  complexity  of  the  automata 
we  can  build,  and  self -reproduction  requires  an  automaton  of  con- 
siderable complexity. 

Von  Neumann  discussed  reliability  at  length  in  his  "Probabilistic 
Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from  Unreliable 
Components. "  His  work  on  self -reproducing  automata  is  found  chiefly 
in  the  present  volume.  Part  II,  which  constitutes  the  bulk  of  the 
present  volume,  treats  the  logical  design  of  a  self-reproducing  cellular 
automaton.  Though  the  shorter  Part  I  is  devoted  to  complicated 
automata  in  general,  its  high  point  is  the  kinematic  model  of  self- 
reproduction  (Fifth  Lecture).  It  therefore  seemed  appropriate  to  use 
the  title  "Theory  of  Self-Reproducing  Automata"  for  the  whole 
work. 

It  is  unfortunate  that,  because  of  his  premature  death,  von  Neu- 
mann was  unable  to  put  in  final  form  any  of  the  research  he  was 
doing  in  automata  theory.  The  manuscripts  for  both  parts  of  the 
present  volume  were  unfinished;  indeed,  they  were  both,  in  a  sense, 
first  drafts.  There  is  one  compensation  in  this:  one  can  see  von  Neu- 
mann's powerful  mind  at  work.  Early  drafts  by  a  thinker  of  von 
Neumann's  ability  are  not  often  available.  For  this  reason,  I  have 
tried  hard  to  preserve  the  original  flavor  of  von  Neumann's  manu- 
scripts, while  yet  rendering  them  easily  readable.  So  that  the  reader 
will  know  what  the  raw  manuscripts  are  like,  I  will  describe  them 
and  the  editorial  changes  I  have  made  in  them. 

Von  Neumann  agreed  to  write  a  book  on  automata  theory  in  con- 
nection with  his  five  lectures  at  the  University  of  Illinois  in  Decem- 
ber, 1949.  A  tape  recording  of  the  lectures  was  made  to  aid  him  in 
writing  the  book.  Unfortunately,  the  recording  and  the  typescript  of 
it  turned  out  badly,  with  gaps  in  the  text,  unintelligible  passages,  and 
missing  words.  Von  Neumann  himself  never  edited  this  typescript, 
but  instead  planned  to  use  the  manuscript  "The  Theory  of  Auto- 
mata: Construction,  Reproduction,  Homogeneity"  for  the  promised 
book.  The  recording  itself  is  not  extant.  Despite  these  circumstances, 
the  Illinois  lectures  deserve  publication,  and  the  recorded  version, 
highly  edited  of  necessity,  constitutes  Part  I  of  this  volume. 

Von  Neumann  prepared  a  detailed  outline  of  the  lectures  in  advance 


PREFACE 


xvii 


of  delivery,  and  the  content  of  the  lectures  corresponded  roughly  to 
this  outline.  The  outline  bore  the  title  "Theory  and  Organization  of 
Complicated  Automata/'  and  began  with  the  following  three  lines: 

The  logical  organization  and  limitations  of  high-speed  digital 

computers. 

Comparison  of  these  and  other  complicated  automata,  both 
artificial  and  natural. 

Inference  from  the  comparison  of  the  nervous  systems 
found  in  nature. 

There  followed  the  title  of  each  lecture  and  a  list  of  topics  to  be  cov- 
ered in  that  lecture;  these  are  reproduced  verbatim  at  the  beginning 
of  each  lecture  below,  even  though  the  lecture  materials  do  not  cor- 
respond exactly  to  the  list  of  topics. 

Because  of  the  state  of  the  manuscript  it  has  been  necessary  to  do 
much  editing.  The  typescript  of  the  recording  is  especially  poor  in  the 
more  formal  portions  of  the  lectures,  where  von  Neumann  used  the 
blackboard.  For  these  portions,  particularly,  I  have  found  two  sets 
of  notes  taken  at  the  lectures  to  be  helpful.  I  have  preserved  von 
Neumann's  phraseology  where  feasible,  but  I  have  frequently  found 
it  necessary  to  use  my  own  words.  I  have  sometimes  felt  it  best  to 
summarize  what  von  Neumann  was  saying  rather  than  to  attempt 
to  reconstruct  the  text.  Several  of  the  points  von  Neumann  made  in 
the  Illinois  lectures  also  appear  in  his  published  writings,  or  are  well 
known,  and  in  these  cases  I  have  often  summarized  what  von  Neu- 
mann said  or  given  references  to  his  published  works. 

Where  the  writing  is  strictly  my  own,  it  appears  in  brackets.  The 
reconstructed  edition  of  von  Neumann's  words  is  not  bracketed,  but 
it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  much  of  this  unbracketed  text  is  heavily 
edited. 

The  manuscript  "The  Theory  of  Automata:  Construction,  Repro- 
duction, Homogeneity"  was  in  a  much  better  state.  It  seems  to  have 
been  a  first  draft,  with  the  exception  that  there  is  an  earlier  outline 
(with  figures)  of  the  procedure  whereby  the  memory  control  MC 
lengthens  and  shortens  the  connecting  loop  Ci  and  the  timing  loop 
C2  under  the  direction  of  the  constructing  unit  CU  (cf.  Sees.  4.1  and 
4.2).  Despite  its  being  a  first  draft,  the  manuscript  was  publishable 
as  it  stood  except  for  deficiencies  of  the  following  three  types. 

(1)  First,  the  manuscript  lacked  many  of  those  simple  mecha- 
nisms which  make  for  easy  reading.  There  were  no  figure  titles.  For- 
mulas, sections,  and  figures  were  referred  to  by  number  only,  without 
explicit  indication  as  to  whether  the  item  referred  to  is  a  formula, 
section,  or  figure.  Section  titles  were  listed  on  a  separate  sheet.  Also 


xviii 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


on  a  separate  sheet,  von  Neumann  gave  only  brief  indications  for  the 
footnotes  he  planned.  Organs  were  referred  to  by  letter  alone.  For 
example,  von  Neumann  merely  used  "A"  and  "B"  to  refer  to  the 
organs  I  have  called  the  "constructing  unit  CU"  and  the  "memory 
control  MC,"  respectively.  I  have  worked  through  the  manuscript 
several  times  and  each  time  I  have  been  amazed  at  how  von  Neumann 
could  keep  track  of  what  he  was  doing  with  so  few  mnemonic  devices. 

In  editing  the  manuscript  I  have  endeavored  to  supply  these  de- 
vices. For  example,  where  von  Neumann  wrote  "CO"  I  often  put 
"control  organ  CO."  I  have  added  titles  to  the  figures  and  completed 
the  footnote  references.  Von  Neumann  wrote  some  explanatory  re- 
marks on  the  figures;  these  have  been  moved  to  the  text.  Similar 
and  related  changes  have  been  made,  all  without  any  indication  in 
the  text. 

In  addition,  I  have  inserted  footnotes,  commentaries,  explanations, 
and  summaries  at  various  places  in  the  text,  and  have  added  a  con- 
including  chapter  (Ch.  5).  All  such  additions  are  in  brackets.  Von 
Neumann's  brackets  have  been  changed  to  braces,  except  for  his 
usage  "[0]"  and  "[1]"  to  refer  to  ordinary  and  special  symbols.  In 
connection  with  my  bracketed  additions,  I  have  added  Tables  I  and 
V  and  many  figures.  Figures  1-8,  16,  18,  19,  22,  24,  28-36,  38,  39, 
and  41  are  von  Neumann's;  the  remaining  figures  are  mine. 

(2)  Second,  the  manuscript  "Theory  of  Automata:  Construction, 
Reproduction,  Homogeneity"  contained  many  errors.  These  range 
from  minor  slips  (which  I  have  corrected  without  any  specific  indica- 
tion), through  errors  of  medium  significance  (which  I  have  corrected 
or  commented  on  in  bracketed  passages),  to  major  errors  requiring 
considerable  redesign  (which  I  have  discussed  in  Sections  5.1.1  and 
5.1.2).  All  of  these  errors  are  correctable,  but  because  organs  designed 
in  the  earlier  parts  of  the  manuscript  are  used  in  later  parts,  many  of 
these  errors  propagate  and  "amplify."  In  this  connection,  it  should 
be  kept  in  mind  that  the  manuscript  was  an  early  draft,  and  that 
von  Neumann  was  working  out  the  design  as  he  proceeded,  leaving 
many  design  parameters  for  later  specification. 

(3)  Third,  the  manuscript  "Theory  of  Automata:  Construction, 
Reproduction,  Homogeneity"  is  incomplete.  The  construction  stops 
before  the  tape  unit  is  quite  finished.  In  Chapter  5  I  show  how  to 
complete  the  design  of  von  Neumann's  self -reproducing  automaton. 

The  technical  development  of  the  manuscript  is  extremely  com- 
plicated and  involved.  The  deficiencies  just  mentioned  add  to  its 
difficulty.  In  some  respects  it  would  have  been  editorially  easier  not 
to  edit  the  manuscript  after  Chapter  2  and  instead  work  out  the 


PREFACE 


xix 


design  of  von  Neumann's  self -reproducing  automaton  along  the  lines 
he  last  envisaged.  But  this  was  not  a  real  alternative  because  of  the 
historical  importance  of  the  manuscript,  and  the  opportunity  it  gives 
to  observe  a  powerful  mind  at  work.  I  have  therefore  endeavored  to 
make  corrections  and  add  comments  so  as  to  preserve  the  original 
style  of  the  manuscript  while  making  it  relatively  easy  to  read. 

I  am  indebted  to  a  number  of  people  for  their  assistance.  The  late 
Mrs.  Klara  von  Neumann-Eckardt  gave  me  information  about  her 
husband's  manuscripts.  Several  people  who  worked  with  von  Neu- 
mann on  computers  gave  me  firsthand  information:  Abraham  Taub, 
Herman  Goldstine,  the  late  Adele  Goldstine,  and  especially  Julian 
Bigelow  and  Stan  Ulam;  von  Neumann  often  discussed  his  work  on 
automata  theory  with  Bigelow  and  with  Ulam.  John  Kemeny,  Pierce 
Ketchum,  E.  F.  Moore,  and  Claude  Shannon  heard  lectures  by  or 
had  discussions  with  von  Neumann  on  automata  theory.  Kurt  GodePs 
letter  at  the  end  of  the  Second  Lecture  of  Part  I  is  reproduced  with 
his  kind  permission.  Thanks  go  to  many  of  my  graduate  students 
and  research  associates  for  technical  assistance,  particularly  Michael 
Faiman,  John  Hanne,  James  Thatcher,  Stephen  Hedetniemi,  Frederick 
Suppe,  and  Richard  Laing.  Alice  Finney,  Karen  Brandt,  Ann  Jacobs, 
and  Alice  R.  Burks  have  provided  editorial  assistance.  M.  Elizabeth 
Brandt  drew  the  figures.  My  editorial  work  was  supported  by  the 
National  Science  Foundation.  None  of  these  share  any  responsibility 
for  the  editing. 

Arthur  W.  Burks 
Ann  Arbor,  1965 


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 


Von  Neumann's  Work  on  Computers 

John  von  Neumann  was  born  on  December  28,  1903  in  Budapest, 
Hungary,  and  died  in  Washington,  D.C.,  February  8,  1957. 1  He 
earned  a  doctorate  in  mathematics  from  the  University  of  Budapest 
and  an  undergraduate  chemistry  degree  from  the  Eidgenossische 
Technische  Hochschule  in  Zurich,  Switzerland.  He  became  a  Privat- 
docent  at  the  University  of  Berlin  in  1927  and  a  Privatdocent  at  the 
University  of  Hamburg  in  1929.  In  1930  he  came  to  the  United  States 
as  a  visiting  lecturer  at  Princeton  University,  where  he  was  made  full 
professor  in  1931.  In  1933  he  joined  the  newly  formed  Institute  for 
Advanced  Study  as  a  professor  and  retained  that  post  for  the  rest  of 
his  life.2 

In  later  life,  while  retaining  his  theoretical  interests  and  produc- 
tivity, von  Neumann  developed  strong  interests  in  the  applications 
of  mathematics.  During  the  Second  World  War  he  became  heavily 
involved  in  scientific  research  on  problems  of  defense.  He  played  a 
major  role  in  the  development  of  the  atomic  bomb,  contributing 
particularly  to  the  method  of  implosion.  He  was  a  consultant  to 
many  government  laboratories  and  organizations  and  a  member  of 
many  important  scientific  advisory  committees.  After  the  war  he 
continued  these  consulting  and  advisory  activities.  Altogether  he 
was  involved  in  such  diverse  fields  as  ordnance,  submarine  warfare, 
bombing  objectives,  nuclear  weapons  (including  the  hydrogen  bomb), 
military  strategy,  weather  prediction,  intercontinental  ballistic  mis- 
siles, high-speed  electronic  digital  computers,  and  computing  methods. 
In  October,  1954,  the  President  of  the  United  States  appointed  him 
to  the  United  States  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  a  position  he  held 
at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  received  many  awards  and  honors  during 
his  lifetime,  including  membership  in  the  National  Academy  of  Sci- 
ences, two  Presidential  Awards,  and  the  Enrico  Fermi  Award  of  the 
Atomic  Energy  Commission.  The  latter  was  given  especially  for  his 

1  See  Ulam,  "John  von  Neumann,"  and  Mrs.  von  Neumann's  preface  to  The 
Computer  and  the  Brain. 

2  See  his  Collected  Works,  edited  by  A.  Taub.  An  excellent  summary  of  von 
Neumann's  accomplishments  is  presented  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  American 
Mathematical  Society,  Vol.  64,  No.  3,  Part  2,  May,  1958. 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


contributions  to  the  development  of  electronic  computers  and  their 
uses. 

Von  Neumann  the  Mathematician.  During  the  last  years  of  his  life 
John  von  Neumann  devoted  considerable  effort  to  developing  a 
theory  of  automata.  The  present  volume,  edited  from  two  unfinished 
manuscripts,  is  his  last  work  on  this  subject.  Because  of  his  premature 
death  he  was  unable  to  finish  a  volume  which  would  present  a  com- 
plete picture  of  what  he  wished  to  accomplish.  It  is  therefore  appro- 
priate to  summarize  here  the  main  features  of  his  projected  theory 
of  automata.  Since  his  conception  of  automata  theory  arose  out  of 
his  work  in  mathematics  and  computers,  we  will  begin  by  describing 
that  work. 

Von  Neumann  was  a  very  great  mathematician.  He  made  many 
important  contributions  in  a  wide  range  of  fields.  Von  Neumann 
himself  thought  his  most  important  mathematical  achievements  , 
were  in  three  areas:  the  mathematical  foundations  of  quantum  theory, 
the  theory  of  operators,  and  ergodic  theory.  His  contributions  in  other 
areas  bear  more  directly  on  his  computer  work.  In  the  late  1920,s  he 
wrote  on  symbolic  logic,  set  theory,  axiomatics,  and  proof  theory. 
In  the  middle  thirties  he  worked  on  lattice  theory,  continuous  ge- 
ometry, and  Boolean  algebra.  In  a  famous  paper  of  1928  and  in  a 
book  of  19443  he  founded  the  modern  mathematical  theory  of  games. 
Starting  in  the  late  thirties  and  continuing  through  and  after  the 
war  he  did  much  research  in  fluid  dynamics,  dynamics,  problems  in 
the  mechanics  of  continua  arising  out  of  nuclear  technology,  and 
meteorology.  During  the  war  he  became  involved  in  computing 
and  computers,  and  after  the  war  this  became  his  main  interest. 

Von  Neumann  and  Computing.  Von  Neumann  was  led  into  com- 
puting by  his  studies  in  fluid  dynamics.  Hydrodynamical  phenomena 
are  treated  mathematically  by  means  of  non-linear  partial  differential 
equations.  Von  Neumann  became  especially  interested  in  hydro- 
dynamical  turbulence  and  the  interaction  of  shock  waves.  He  soon 
found  that  existing  analytical  methods  were  inadequate  for  obtaining 
even  qualitative  information  about  the  solutions  of  non-linear  partial 
differential  equations  in  fluid  dynamics.  Moreover,  this  was  so  of 
non-linear  partial  differential  equations  generally. 

Von  Neumann's  response  to  this  situation  was  to  do  computing.4 
During  the  war  he  found  computing  necessary  to  obtain  answers  to 

3  "Zur  Theorie  der  Gesellschaftsspiel."  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Be- 
havior, with  Oskar  Morgenstern. 

4  See  Ulam,  "John  von  Neumann,"  pp.  7-8,  28  ff.,  and  Birkhoff,  Hydrody- 
namics, pp.  5,  25. 


editor's  introduction 




problems  in  other  fields,  including  nuclear  technology.  Hence,  when 
the  new  high-speed  electronic  digital  general-purpose  computers  were 
developed  during  and  after  the  war,  he  was  quick  to  recognize  their 
potentialities  for  hydrodynamics  as  well  as  other  fields.  In  this  con- 
nection he  developed  a  general  method  for  using  computers  which  is 
of  very  great  importance  because  it  is  applicable  to  a  wide  variety 
of  problems  in  pure  and  applied  mathematics. 

The  procedure  which  he  pioneered  and  promoted  is  to  employ 
computers  to  solve  crucial  cases  numerically  and  to  use  the  results 
as  a  heuristic  guide  to  theorizing.  Von  Neumann  believed  experi- 
mentation and  computing  to  have  shown  that  there  are  physical 
and  mathematical  regularities  in  the  phenomena  of  fluid  dynamics 
and  important  statistical  properties  of  families  of  solutions  of  the 
non-linear  partial  differential  equations  involved.  These  regularities 
and  general  properties  could  constitute  the  basis  of  a  new  theory  of 
fluid  dynamics  and  of  the  corresponding  non-linear  equations.  Von 
Neumann  believed  that  one  could  discover  these  regularities  and 
general  properties  by  solving  many  specific  equations  and  generaliz- 
ing the  results.  From  the  special  cases  one  would  gain  a  feeling  for 
such  phenomena  as  turbulence  and  shock  waves,  and  with  this  quali- 
tative orientation  could  pick  out  further  critical  cases  to  solve  nu- 
merically, eventually  developing  a  satisfactory  theory.  See  the  First 
Lecture  of  Part  I  of  this  volume. 

This  particular  method  of  using  computers  is  so  important  and  has 
so  much  in  common  with  other,  seemingly  quite  different,  uses  of 
computers  that  it  deserves  extended  discussion.  It  is  of  the  essence 
of  this  procedure  that  computer  solutions  are  not  sought  for  their 
own  sake,  but  as  an  aid  to  discovering  useful  concepts,  broad  prin- 
ciples, and  general  theories.  It  is  thus  appropriate  to  refer  to  this  as 
the  heuristic  use  of  computers.5 

The  heuristic  use  of  computers  is  similar  to  and  may  be  combined 
with  the  traditional  hypothetical-deductive-experimental  method  of 
science.  In  that  method  one  makes  an  hypothesis  on  the  basis  of  the 
available  information,  derives  consequences  from  it  by  means  of 
mathematics,  tests  the  consequences  experimentally,  and  forms  a 
new  hypothesis  on  the  basis  of  the  findings;  this  sequence  is  iterated 
indefinitely.  In  using  a  computer  heuristically  one  proceeds  in  the 
same  way,  with  computation  replacing  or  augmenting  experimenta- 
tion. One  makes  an  hypothesis  about  the  equations  under  investiga- 

5  See  also  Ulam,  A  Collection  of  Mathematical  Problems,  Ch.  8,  ' 'Computing 
Machines  as  a  Heuristic  Aid." 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


tion,  attempts  to  pick  out  some  crucial  special  cases,  uses  a  computer 
to  solve  these  cases,  checks  the  hypothesis  against  the  results,  forms 
a  new  hypothesis,  and  iterates  the  cycle. 

The  computations  may  also  be  compared  with  experimental  data. 
When  this  is  done  the  heuristic  use  of  computers  becomes  simulation. 
Computation  in  itself  can  only  provide  answers  to  purely  mathe- 
matical questions,  so  when  no  comparison  is  made  with  empirical 
fact  the  heuristic  use  of  computers  contributes  to  pure  mathematics. 
Von  Neumann  thought  that  the  main  difficulties  in  fluid  dynamics 
stemmed  from  inadequate  mathematical  knowledge  of  non-linear 
partial  differential  equations,  and  that  the  heuristic  use  of  computers 
would  help  mathematicians  to  construct  an  adequate  and  useful 
theory  for  this  subject.  He  pointed  out  that  while  much  progress 
had  been  made  by  means  of  wind  tunnels,  since  the  equations  govern- 
ing the  phenomena  were  known,  these  wind  tunnels  were  being  used 
as  analog  computers  rather  than  as  experimental  apparatus. 

.  .  .  many  branches  of  both  pure  and  applied  mathematics  are  in  great  need 
of  computing  instruments  to  break  the  present  stalemate  created  by  the 
failure  of  the  purely  analytical  approach  to  non-linear  problems.  .  .  .  really 
efficient  high-speed  computing  devices  may,  in  the  field  of  non-linear  partial 
differential  equations  as  well  as  in  many  other  fields,  which  are  now  difficult 
or  entirely  denied  access,  provide  us  with  those  heuristic  hints  which  are 
needed  in  all  parts  of  mathematics  for  genuine  progress.6 

Von  Neumann's  suggestion  that  powerful  computers  may  provide 
the  mathematician  "with  those  heuristic  hints  which  are  needed  in 
all  parts  of  mathematics  for  genuine  progress"  is  connected  to  his 
strong  conviction  that  pure  mathematics  depends  heavily  on  empirical 
science  for  its  ideas  and  problems.  .  .  the  best  inspirations  of  mod- 
ern mathematics  .  .  .  originated  in  the  natural  sciences.,,  7  He  recog- 
nized that  mathematics  is  not  an  empirical  science  and  held  that  the 
mathematician's  criteria  of  selection  of  problems  and  of  success  are 
mainly  aesthetical. 

I  think  that  it  is  a  relatively  good  approximation  to  truth — which  is 
much  too  complicated  to  allow  anything  but  approximations — that  mathe- 
matical ideas  originate  in  empirics,  although  the  genealogy  is  sometimes  long 
and  obscure.  But  once  they  are  so  conceived,  the  subject  begins  to  live  a 
peculiar  life  of  its  own  and  is  better  compared  to  a  creative  one,  governed  by 
almost  entirely  aesthetical  motivations,  than  to  anything  else  and,  in  par- 

6  Von  Neumann  and  Goldstine,  "On  the  Principles  of  Large  Scale  Comput- 
ing Machines,"  Collected  Works  5.4. 

7  "The  Mathematician,"  Collected  Works  1.2.  The  next  quotation  is  from 
the  same  article,  1.9. 


editor's  introduction 




ticular,  to  an  empirical  science.  There  is,  however,  a  further  point  which,  I 
believe,  needs  stressing.  ...  at  a  great  distance  from  its  empirical  source,  or 
after  much  "abstract"  inbreeding,  a  mathematical  subject  is  in  danger  of 
degeneration.  .  .  .  whenever  this  stage  is  reached,  the  only  remedy  seems  to 
me  to  be  the  rejuvenating  return  to  the  source:  the  reinjection  of  more  or 
less  directly  empirical  ideas. 

The  role  that  empirical  science  plays  in  pure  mathematics  is  a 
heuristic  one:  empirical  science  supplies  problems  to  investigate  and 
suggests  concepts  and  principles  for  their  solution.  While  von  Neu- 
mann never  said  so,  I  think  it  likely  that  he  thought  the  computations 
produced  by  the  heuristic  use  of  computers  can  play  the  same  role 
in  some  areas  of  mathematics.  In  the  First  Lecture  of  Part  I  below 
he  said  that  powerful  methods  in  pure  mathematics  depend  for  their 
success  on  the  mathematicians  having  an  intuitive  and  heuristic 
understanding  of  them,  and  suggested  that  one  can  build  this  in- 
tuitive familiarity  with  non-linear  differential  equations  by  using 
computers  heuristically.8 

It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  heuristic  use  of  computers  the  hu- 
man, not  the  machine,  is  the  main  source  of  suggestions,  hypotheses, 
heuristic  hints,  and  new  ideas.  Von  Neumann  wished  to  make  the 
machine  as  intelligent  as  possible,  but  he  recognized  that  human 
powers  of  intuition,  spatial  imagery,  originality,  etc.,  are  far  superior 
to  those  of  present  or  immediately  foreseeable  machines.  He  wished  to 
augment  the  ability  of  a  skilled,  informed,  creative  human  by  the 
use  of  a  digital  computer  as  a  tool.  This  procedure  would  involve 
considerable  interaction  between  man  and  the  machine  and  would 
be  facilitated  by  automatic  programming  and  by  input-output  equip- 
ment designed  for  direct  human  use. 

Once  he  became  interested  in  computing,  von  Neumann  made 
important  contributions  to  all  aspects  of  the  subject  and  its  tech- 
nology. The  extant  methods  of  computation  had  been  developed  for 
hand  computation  and  punched  card  machines  and  hence  were  not 
well  suited  to  the  new  electronic  computers,  which  were  several  orders 
of  magnitude  faster  than  the  old.  New  methods  were  needed,  and  von 
Neumann  developed  many  of  them.  He  contributed  at  all  levels.  He 
devised  algorithms  and  wrote  programs  for  computations  ranging 
from  the  calculation  of  elementary  functions  to  the  integration  of 
non-linear  partial  differential  equations  and  the  solutions  of  games. 

8  In  view  of  von  Neumann's  emphasis  on  the  role  of  intuition  in  mathemati- 
cal discovery  it  is  of  interest  to  note  that  von  Neumann's  own  intuition  was 
auditory  and  abstract  rather  than  visual.  See  Ulam,  "John  von  Neumann, 
1903-1957,"  pp.  12,  23,  and  38-39. 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


He  worked  on  general  techniques  for  numerical  integration  and  in- 
verting matrices.  He  obtained  results  in  the  theory  of  numerical 
stability  and  the  accumulation  of  round-off  errors.  He  helped  develop 
the  Monte  Carlo  method  for  solving  integro-differential  equations, 
inverting  matrices,  and  solving  linear  systems  of  equations  by  ran- 
dom sampling  techniques.9  In  this  method  the  problem  to  be  solved 
is  reduced  to  a  statistical  problem  which  is  then  solved  by  computing 
the  results  for  a  sufficiently  large  sample  of  instances. 

Von  Neumann  also  made  important  contributions  to  the  design 
and  programming  of  computers,  and  to  the  theory  thereof.  We  will 
survey  his  work  in  these  areas  next. 

Logical  Design  of  Computers.  With  his  strong  interest  in  computing 
and  his  background  in  logic  and  physics  it  was  natural  for  von  Neu- 
mann to  become  involved  in  the  development  of  high-speed  electronic 
digital  computers.  The  first  such  computer  was  the  ENIAC,  designed 
and  built  at  the  Moore  School  of  Electrical  Engineering  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Pennsylvania  during  the  period  1943  to  1946. 10  Von  Neu- 
mann had  some  contacts  with  this  machine,  and  so  a  few  words  about 
it  are  in  order. 

The  idea  of  constructing  a  general  purpose  high-speed  computer  of 
electronic  components  originated  with  John  Mauchly,  who  suggested 
to  H.  H.  Goldstine  of  the  Ordnance  Department  that  the  United 
States  Army  support  the  development  and  construction  of  such  a 
machine,  to  be  used  primarily  for  ballistics  computations.  This  sup- 
port was  given,  the  Army  being  impressed  especially  with  the  great 
speed  with  which  an  electronic  computer  could  prepare  firing  tables. 
The  ENIAC  was  designed  and  constructed  by  a  number  of  people, 
including  the  writer,  under  the  technical  direction  of  Mauchly  and 
J.  P.  Eckert.  Von  Neumann  came  to  visit  us  while  we  were  building 
the  ENIAC,  and  he  immediately  became  interested  in  it.  By  this  time 
the  design  of  the  ENIAC  was  already  fixed,  but  after  the  ENIAC  was 
completed  von  Neumann  showed  how  to  modify  it  so  that  it  was  much 
simpler  to  program.  In  the  meantime  he  developed  the  logical  design 
for  a  radically  new  computer,  which  we  will  describe  later. 

The  ENIAC  was,  of  course,  radically  different  from  any  earlier 

9  Ulam,  "John  von  Neumann,''  pp.  33-34.  Von  Neumann  Collected  Works 
5.751-764.  The  method  is  described  in  Metropolis  and  Ulam,  "The  Monte  Carlo 
Method." 

10  See  Burks,  "Electronic  Computing  Circuits  of  the  ENIAC"  and  "Super 
Electronic  Computing  Machine,"  Goldstine  and  Goldstine,  "The  Electronic 
Numerical  Integrator  and  Computer  (ENIAC),"  and  Brainerd  and  Sharpless, 
"The  ENIAC." 


editor's  introduction 




computer,  but  interestingly  enough,  it  was  also  quite  different  from 
its  immediate  successors.  It  differed  from  its  immediate  successors  in 
two  fundamental  respects:  the  use  of  several  semiautonomous  com- 
puting units  working  simultaneously  and  semi-independently,  and 
the  exclusive  reliance  on  vacuum  tubes  for  high-speed  storage.  Both 
of  these  design  features  resulted  from  the  electronic  technology  of  the 
time. 

The  basic  pulse  rate  of  the  ENIAC  circuits  was  100,000  pulses  per 
second.  To  obtain  a  high  computation  speed  all  10  (or  20)  decimal 
digits  were  processed  in  parallel,  and,  moreover,  a  large  number  of 
computing  units  were  constructed,  each  with  some  local  programming 
equipment,  so  that  many  computations  could  proceed  simultaneously 
under  the  overall  direction  of  a  master  programming  unit.  There  were 
30  basic  units  in  the  ENIAC:  20  accumulators  (each  of  which  could 
store  and  add  a  10-digit  number),  1  multiplier,  1  divider  and  square- 
rooter,  3  function  table  units,  an  input  unit,  an  output  unit,  a  master 
programmer,  and  2  other  units  concerned  with  control.  All  of  these 
basic  units  could  operate  at  the  same  time. 

At  that  time  the  vacuum  tube  was  the  only  reliable  high-speed  stor- 
age device — acoustic  delay  lines,  electrostatic  storage  systems,  mag- 
netic cores,  etc.,  all  came  later — and  so  of  necessity  vacuum  tubes  were 
used  for  high-speed  storage  as  well  as  for  arithmetic  and  for  logical 
control.  This  entailed  a  severe  limitation  on  the  high-speed  store,  as 
vacuum  tubes  are  an  expensive  and  bulky  storage  medium — the 
ENIAC  contained  18,000  vacuum  tubes  as  it  was,  a  sufficient  number 
for  the  skeptics  to  predict  that  it  would  never  operate  properly.  The 
limited  high  speed  storage  of  20  10-digit  decimal  numbers  was  aug- 
mented by  large  quantities  of  low-speed  storage  of  various  types:  elec- 
tromagnetic relays  for  input  and  output,  hand  operated  mechanical 
switches  controlling  resistor  matrices  in  the  function  table  units  for 
the  storage  of  arbitrary  numerical  functions  and  of  program  informa- 
tion, and  hand-operated  mechanical  switches  and  flexible  plug-in 
cables  for  programming. 

A  general  purpose  computer  must  be  programmed  for  each  particu- 
lar problem.  This  was  done  on  the  ENIAC  by  hand:  by  setting  me- 
chanical switches  of  the  program  controls  of  each  of  the  computing 
units  used  in  the  problem,  interconnecting  these  program  controls  with 
cables,  and  setting  the  switches  of  the  function  tables.  This  program- 
ming procedure  was  long,  laborious,  and  hard  to  check,  and  while  it 
was  being  done  the  machine  stood  idle.  After  the  ENIAC  was  com- 
pleted, von  Neumann  showed  how  to  convert  it  into  a  centrally 
programmed  computer  in  which  all  the  programming  could  be  done 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


by  setting  switches  on  the  function  tables.  Each  of  the  three  function 
table  units  had  a  switch  storage  capacity  of  104  entries,  each  entry 
consisting  of  12  decimal  digits  and  2  sign  digits.  However,  the  pulses 
used  to  represent  numbers  were  the  same  size  and  shape  as  the  pulses 
used  to  stimulate  program  controls,  so  that  the  function  table  units 
could  also  be  used  to  store  program  information.  On  von  Neumann's 
scheme  the  outputs  of  the  function  tables  were  connected  to  the  pro- 
gram controls  of  the  other  units  through  some  special  equipment  and 
the  master  programmer,  and  the  switches  on  the  program  controls 
of  these  units  were  set.  All  of  this  was  done  in  such  a  way  that  it  need 
not  be  changed  from  problem  to  problem.  Programming  was  thus 
reduced  to  setting  switches  by  hand  on  the  function  table  units. 

In  the  meantime  we  were  all  concerned  with  the  design  of  much 
more  powerful  computers.  As  mentioned  earlier,  the  greatest  weakness 
of  the  ENIAC  was  the  smallness  of  its  high-speed  storage  capacity, 
resulting  from  the  technological  fact  that  at  the  time  the  design  of 
the  ENIAC  was  fixed  the  vacuum  tube  was  the  only  known  reliable 
high-speed  storage  component.  This  limitation  was  overcome  and  the 
technology  of  computers  changed  abruptly  when  J.  P.  Eckert  con- 
ceived of  using  an  acoustic  delay  line  as  a  high-speed  storage  device. 
Acoustic  delay  lines  made  of  mercury  had  been  used  to  delay  pulses 
in  war  time  radar  equipment.  Eckert's  idea  was  to  feed  the  output  of 
a  mercury  delay  line  (through  an  amplifier  and  pulse  reshaper)  back 
into  its  input,  thereby  storing  a  large  number  of  pulses  in  a  circulat- 
ing memory.  A  circulating  memory  of,  say,  1000  bits  could  be  built 
with  a  mercury  delay  line  and  a  few  tubes,  in  contrast  to  the  ENIAC 
where  a  double  triode  was  required  for  each  bit. 

In  the  ENIAC  the  few  numbers  being  processed  were  stored  in  cir- 
cuits that  could  be  changed  both  automatically  and  rapidly;  all  other 
numbers  and  the  program  information  were  stored  in  electromagnetic 
relays,  switches,  and  cable  interconnections.  It  now  became  possible  to 
store  all  this  information  in  mercury  delay  lines,  where  it  would  be 
quickly  and  automatically  accessible.  The  ENIAC  wras  a  mixed  syn- 
chronous, asynchronous  machine.  The  use  of  pulses  in  the  mercury 
delay  lines  made  it  natural  to  build  a  completely  synchronous  machine 
timed  by  a  central  source  of  pulses  called  the  " clock.' '  Eckert  and 
Mauchly  designed  circuits  capable  of  operating  at  a  pulse  rate  of  1 
megacycle,  10  times  the  basic  pulse  rate  of  the  ENIAC,  and  gave  con- 
siderable thought  to  the  design  of  a  mercury  delay  line  machine. 
Goldstine  brought  von  Neumann  in  as  a  consultant,  and  we  all  par- 
ticipated in  discussions  of  the  logical  design  of  such  a  machine.  It  was 
decided  to  use  the  binary  system.  Since  the  delay  lines  operated 


editor's  introduction 


g 


serially,  the  simplest  way  to  process  the  bits  was  seriatim.  All  of  this 
made  it  possible  to  build  a  machine  much  smaller  than  the  ENIAC 
and  yet  much  more  powerful  than  the  ENIAC.  The  proposed  machine 
was  to  be  called  the  EDVAC.  It  was  estimated  that  it  could  be  built 
with  about  3000  vacuum  tubes. 

Von  Neumann  then  worked  out  in  considerable  detail  the  logical 
design  of  this  computer.  The  result  appeared  in  his  First  Draft  of  a 
Report  on  the  EDVAC,11  which  was  never  published.  Since  this  report 
contained  the  first  logical  design  of  an  electronic  computer  in  which 
the  program  could  be  stored  and  modified  electronically,  I  will  sum- 
marize its  contents.  Of  particular  interest  to  us  here  are  the  following 
features  of  his  design:  the  separation  of  logical  from  circuit  design,  the 
comparison  of  the  machine  to  the  human  nervous  system,  the  general 
organization  of  the  machine,  and  the  treatment  of  programming  and 
control. 

Von  Neumann  based  his  construction  on  idealized  switch-delay  ele- 
ments derived  from  the  idealized  neural  elements  of  McCulloch  and 
Pitts.12  Each  such  element  has  one  to  three  excitatory  inputs,  possibly 
one  or  two  inhibitory  inputs,  a  threshold  number  (1,  2,  3),  and  a  unit 
delay.  It  emits  a  stimulus  at  time  t  +  1  if  and  only  if  two  conditions  / 
are  satisfied  at  time  t:  (1)  no  inhibitory  input  is  stimulated,  (2)  the 
number  of  excitatory  inputs  stimulated  is  at  least  as  great  as  the 
threshold  number.13 

The  use  of  idealized  computing  elements  has  two  advantages.  First, 
it  enables  the  designer  to  separate  the  logical  design  from  the  circuit 
design  of  the  computer.  When  designing  the  ENIAC,  we  developed 
logical  design  rules,  but  these  were  inextricably  tied  in  with  rules 
governing  circuit  design.  With  idealized  computing  elements  one  can 
distinguish  the  purely  logical  (memory  and  truth-functional)  require- 
ments for  a  computer  from  the  requirements  imposed  by  the  state  of 
technology  and  ultimately  by  the  physical  limitations  of  the  materials 
and  components  from  which  the  computer  is  made.  Logical  design  is 
the  first  step;  circuit  design  follows.  The  elements  for  logical  design 

11  The  initials  abbreviate  "Electronic  Discrete  Variable  Automatic  Com- 
puter." The  machine  of  this  name  actually  constructed  at  the  Moore  School 
of  Electrical  Engineering  was  built  after  the  people  mentioned  above  were 
no  longer  connected  with  the  Moore  School.  The  logical  design  of  the  Cam- 
bridge University  EDSAC  was  based  on  this  report.  Wilkes,  "Progress  in  High- 
Speed  Calculating  Machine  Design"  and  Automatic  Digital  Computers. 

12  "A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent  in  Nervous  Activity." 

13  The  threshold  elements  of  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Re- 
liable Organisms  from  Unreliable  Components,"  Collected  Works  5.332,  are 
similar,  but  differ  with  respect  to  the  operation  of  inhibitory  inputs. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


should  be  chosen  to  correspond  roughly  with  the  resultant  circuits; 
that  is,  the  idealization  should  not  be  so  extreme  as  to  be  unrealistic. 

Second,  the  use  of  idealized  computing  elements  is  a  step  in  the 
direction  of  a  theory  of  automata.  Logical  design  in  terms  of  these 
elements  can  be  done  with  the  rigor  of  mathematical  logic,  whereas 
engineering  design  is  necessarily  an  art  and  a  technique  in  part.  More- 
over, this  approach  facilitates  a  comparison  and  contrast  between 
different  types  of  automata  elements,  in  this  case,  between  computer 
elements  on  the  one  hand  and  neurons  on  the  other.  Von  Neumann 
made  such  comparisons  in  First  Draft  of  a  Report  on  the  EDVAC,  not- 
ing the  differences  as  well  as  the  similarities.  Thus  he  observed  that 
the  circuits  of  the  EDVAC  were  to  be  synchronous  (timed  by  a  pulse 
clock)  while  the  nervous  system  is  presumably  asynchronous  (timed 
autonomously  by  the  successive  reaction  times  of  its  own  elements). 
He  also  noted  the  analogy  between  the  associative,  sensory,  and  motor 
neurons  of  the  human  nervous  system  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
central  part  of  the  computer,  its  input,  and  its  output,  respectively. 
This  comparison  of  natural  and  artificial  automata  was  to  become  a 
strong  theme  of  his  theory  of  automata. 

The  organization  of  the  EDVAC  was  to  be  radically  different  from 
that  of  the  ENIAC.  The  ENIAC  had  a  number  of  basic  units,  all 
capable  of  operating  simultaneously,  so  that  many  streams  of  com- 
putation could  proceed  at  the  same  time.  In  contrast,  the  proposed 
EDVAC  had  only  one  basic  unit  of  each  kind,  and  it  never  performed 
two  arithmetical  or  logical  operations  simultaneously.  These  basic 
units  were  a  high-speed  memory  M,  a  central  arithmetic  unit  CA,  an 
outside  recording  medium  R,  an  input  organ  I,  an  output  organ  O, 
and  a  central  control  CC. 

The  memory  M  was  to  be  composed  of  possibly  as  many  as  256 
delay  lines  each  capable  of  storing  32  words  of  32  bits  each,  together 
with  the  switching  equipment  for  connecting  a  position  of  M  to  the 
rest  of  the  machine.  The  memory  was  to  store  initial  conditions  and 
boundary  conditions  for  partial  differential  equations,  arbitrary 
numerical  functions,  partial  results  obtained  during  a  computation, 
etc.,  as  well  as  the  program  (sequence  of  orders)  directing  the  com- 
putation. The  outside  recording  medium  R  could  be  composed  of 
punched  cards,  paper  tape,  magnetic  wire  or  tape,  or  photographic 
film,  or  combinations  thereof.  It  was  to  be  used  for  input  and  output, 
as  well  as  for  auxiliary  low-speed  storage.  The  input  organ  I  trans- 
ferred information  from  R  to  M;  the  output  organ  O  transferred 
information  from  M  to  R.  The  notation  of  M  was  binary;  that  of  R 
was  decimal. 

The  central  arithmetic  unit  CA  was  to  contain  some  auxiliary  regis- 


editor's  introduction 


1 1 


ters  (one-word  delay  lines)  for  holding  numbers.  Under  the  direction 
of  the  central  control  CC  it  was  to  add,  subtract,  multiply,  divide, 
compute  square-roots,  perform  binary-decimal  and  decimal-binary 
conversions,  transfer  numbers  among  its  registers  and  between  its 
registers  and  M,  and  choose  one  of  two  numbers  according  to  the  sign 
of  a  third  number.  The  last  operation  was  to  be  used  for  transfer  of 
control  (jumping  conditionally)  from  one  order  in  the  program  to 
another.  Numbers  were  processed  in  CA  serially,  the  least  significant 
bits  being  treated  first,  and  only  one  operation  was  performed  at  a 
time. 

The  first  bit  of  each  word  was  zero  for  a  number,  one  for  an  order. 
Eight  bits  of  an  order  were  allotted  to  the  specification  of  the  operation 
to  be  performed  and,  if  a  reference  to  M  was  required,  thirteen  bits  to 
an  address.  A  typical  sequence  would  go  like  this.  Suppose  an  addition 
order  with  memory  address  x  was  located  in  position  y  of  M,  the 
addend  in  the  next  position  y  +  1,  and  the  next  order  to  be  executed 
in  the  next  position  y  +  2.  The  order  at  y  would  go  into  CC,  the  ad- 
dend at  y  +  1  into  CA,  and  the  augend  would  be  found  in  CA;  the 
sum  would  be  placed  in  position  x  of  M.  The  order  at  position  y  +  2 
would  be  executed  next. 

Normally  orders  were  taken  from  the  delay  lines  in  sequence,  but 
one  order  with  address  z  provided  for  CC  to  take  its  next  order  from 
memory  position  z.  When  a  number  was  transferred  from  CA  to 
address  w  of  M,  account  was  taken  of  the  contents  of  w;  if  w  contained 
an  order  (i.e.,  a  word  whose  first  bit  was  one),  then  the  13  most  sig- 
nificant bits  of  the  result  in  CA  were  substituted  for  the  13  address 
bits  located  in  w.  The  addresses  of  orders  could  be  modified  auto- 
matically by  the  machine  in  this  way.  ThisNpro vision,  together  with 
the  order  for  shift  of  control  to  an  arbitrary  memory  position  w  and 
the  power  of  CA  to  choose  one  of  two  numbers  according  to  the  sign 
of  a  third,  made  the  machine  a  fully  automatic  stored  program 
computer. 

At  the  same  time  that  he  worked  out  the  logical  design  of  the 
EDVAC  von  Neumann  suggested  the  development  of  a  high-speed 
memory  incorporating  the  principle  of  the  iconoscope.14  Information 
is  placed  on  the  iconoscope  by  means  of  light  and  sensed  by  an  electron 
beam.  Von  Neumann  suggested  that  information  could  also  be  placed 
on  the  inside  surface  of  such  a  tube  by  means  of  an  electron  beam. 
The  net  result  would  be  storage  in  the  form  of  electrostatic  charges  on 
a  dielectric  plate  inside  a  cathode-ray  tube.  He  predicted  that  such  a 

14  First  Draft  of  a  Report  on  the  EDVAC,  Section  12.8. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


memory  would  prove  superior  to  the  delay  line  memory.  It  soon  be- 
came apparent  that  this  was  so,  and  von  Neumann  turned  his  atten- 
tion to  an  even  more  powerful  computer  based  on  such  a  memory. 

The  new  computer  was  to  be  much  faster  than  any  other  machine 
under  consideration,  mainly  for  two  reasons.  First,  in  an  electrostatic 
storage  system  each  position  is  immediately  accessible,  whereas  a  bit 
or  word  stored  in  a  delay  line  is  not  accessible  until  it  travels  to  the  end 
of  the  line.  Second,  it  was  decided  to  process  all  (40)  bits  of  a  word  in 
parallel,  thereby  reducing  the  computation  time.  The  logical  design  is 
given  in  Preliminary  Discussion  of  the  Logical  Design  of  an  Electronic 
Computing  Instrument.1^  The  proposed  computer  was  built  at  the 
Institute  for  Advanced  Study  by  a  number  of  engineers  under  the  di- 
rection of  Julian  Bigelow,  and  was  popularly  known  as  the  JONIAC.16 
While  the  machine  was  still  under  construction,  its  logical  and  cir- 
cuit design  was  influential  on  many  computers  constructed  in  the 
United  States,  including  computers  at  the  University  of  Illinois,  Los 
Alamos  National  Laboratory,  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Oak 
Ridge  National  Laboratory,  and  the  Rand  Corporation,  as  well  as 
some  machines  produced  commercially.  The  JONIAC  played  an  im- 
portant role  in  the  development  of  the  hydrogen  bomb.17 

Programming  and  Flow  Diagrams.  Von  Neumann  immediately 
recognized  that  these  new  computers  could  solve  large  problems  so 
fast  that  new  programming  procedures  would  be  needed  to  enable 
mathematicians  and  programmers  to  make  full  use  of  the  powers  of 
these  machines.  With  the  order  code  of  the  proposed  Institute  for  Ad- 
vanced Study  computer  in  mind  he  proceeded  to  develop  new  pro- 
gramming methods.  The  results  were  presented  in  the  influential 
series  of  reports  Planning  and  Coding  of  Problems  for  an  Electronic 
Computing  Instrument.1* 

One  generally  begins  with  a  mathematical  formulation  of  a  problem 
and  then  decides  what  explicit  computational  methods  he  will  em- 
ploy. These  methods  are  almost  always  highly  inductive,  involving 
recursions  within  recursions  many  times  over.  What  one  has  at  this 

15  This  was  written  in  collaboration  with  H.  H.  Goldstine  and  the  present 
writer.  It  was  typical  of  von  Neumann  that  he  wanted  the  patentable  material 
in  this  report  to  belong  to  the  public  domain,  and  at  his  suggestion  we  all  signed 
a  notarized  statement  to  this  effect. 

16  It  is  described  by  Estrin,  '  'The  Electronic  Computer  at  the  Institute  for 
Advanced  Study."  The  original  plan  was  to  use  the  memory  described  by 
Rajchman  in  'The  Selectron — a  Tube  for  Selective  Electrostatic  Storage,' '  but 
the  actual  memory  consisted  of  cathode-ray  tubes  operated  in  the  manner  de- 
scribed by  Williams  in  "A  Cathode-Ray  Digit  Store." 

17  New  York  Times,  Feb.  9,  1957,  p.  19. 

18  Written  in  collaboration  with  H.  H.  Goldstine. 


editor's  introduction 




stage  is  a  general  description  of  the  desired  computation,  expressed  in 
the  ordinary  language  and  mathematical  symbolism  of  the  mathe- 
matician. The  task  is  now  to  transform  this  description  into  a  program 
expressed  in  machine  language.  This  is  not  a  simple,  straightforward 
translation  task,  however,  partly  because  of  the  generality  of  the 
description  of  the  computation  and  partly  because  of  the  nature  of 
recursive  procedures. 

Recursive  procedures,  particularly  when  complicated,  are  better 
understood  dynamically  (in  terms  of  their  step  by  step  effects)  rather 
than  statically  (in  terms  of  the  static  sequence  of  symbols  defining 
them).  The  corresponding  aspect  of  the  machine  language  is  that  the 
effect  of  an  order  is  dependent  on  the  very  computation  which  it  itself 
is  helping  to  direct:  whether  and  how  often  an  order  is  used  and  to  what 
memory  position  it  refers.  All  of  these  are  a  function  of  the  whole 
program  and  the  numbers  being  processed.  Thus  a  program,  though  a 
static  sequence  of  symbols,  is  usually  best  understood  in  terms  of  its 
dynamic  effects,  that  is,  its  control  of  the  actual  sequential  computa- 
tional process. 

To  help  bridge  this  gap  between  the  mathematician's  description  of 
the  desired  computation  in  his  own  language  and  the  corresponding 
program  in  the  machine  language,  von  Neumann  invented  the  flow 
diagram.  A  flow  diagram  is  a  labeled  graph  composed  of  enclosures 
and  points  connected  by  lines.  The  enclosures  are  of  various  kinds: 
operation  boxes  (specifying  non-recursive  fragments  of  the  computa- 
tion as  symbolized  in  the  box),  alternative  boxes  (corresponding  to 
conditional  transfer  of  control  orders  and  being  labeled  with  the 
condition  for  transfer),  substitution  and  assertion  boxes  (indicating 
the  values  of  the  indices  of  the  recursions)^  storage  boxes  (giving  the 
contents  of  crucial  parts  of  the  memory  at  certain  stages  of  the  com- 
putation), and  labeled  circles  representing  the  beginning  and  terminus 
and  interconnections.  In  executing  the  program  corresponding  to  a 
given  flow  diagram,  the  computer  in  effect  travels  through  the  flow 
diagram,  starting  at  the  beginning  circle,  executing  sequences  of  or- 
ders described  in  operation  boxes,  cycling  back  or  branching  off  to  a 
new  part  of  the  diagram  according  to  the  criteria  stated  in  alternative 
boxes,  leaving  an  exit  circle  in  one  part  of  the  graph  to  enter  an  en- 
trance circle  in  another  part  of  the  graph,  and  finally  stopping  at  the 
terminal  circle.  Direct  lines  are  used  to  represent  the  direction  of 
passage  through  the  graph,  converging  lines  meeting  at  points  of  the 
graph.  An  undirected  line  is  used  to  connect  a  storage  box  to  that 
point  of  the  graph  which  corresponds  to  the  stage  of  computation 
partly  described  by  the  contents  of  the  storage  box. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


It  is  unnecessary  for  the  programmer  to  prepare  and  code  a  com- 
plete flow  diagram  for  a  complicated  problem.  A  problem  of  any  con- 
siderable complexity  is  composed  of  many  subproblems,  and  flow 
diagrams  and  subroutines  can  be  prepared  for  these  in  advance.  It 
was  planned  to  code  subroutines  corresponding  to  a  large  number  of 
basic  algorithms  employed  in  solving  problems  on  a  digital  computer: 
decimal-to-binary  and  binary-to-decimal  conversion,  double  precision 
arithmetics,  various  integration  and  interpolation  methods,  meshing 
and  sorting  algorithms,  etc.  These  subroutines  would  be  available  in  a 
library  of  tapes.  To  solve  a  particular  problem,  the  programmer  would 
merely  write  a  "combining  routine"  which  would  direct  the  computer 
to  take  the  proper  subroutines  from  the  tape  and  modify  them  ap- 
propriately to  that  particular  problem. 

The  use  of  combining  routines  and  a  library  of  subroutines  was  a 
first  step  in  the  direction  of  using  a  computer  to  help  prepare  programs 
for  itself.  Still,  in  this  system,  everything  written  by  the  programmer 
must  be  in  the  clumsy  "machine  language."  A  better  procedure  is  to 
construct  a  "programmer's  language"  in  which  the  programmer  will 
write  programs,  and  then  to  write  a  translation  program  in  machine 
language  which  directs  the  machine  to  translate  a  program  written  in 
the  programmer's  language  into  a  program  stated  in  machine  lan- 
guage. The  programming  language  would  be  close  to  the  natural  and 
mathematical  language  normally  used  by  mathematicians,  scientists, 
and  engineers,  and  hence  would  be  easy  for  the  programmer  to  use. 
This  approach  is  currently  being  developed  under  the  name  of  auto- 
matic programming.  Von  Neumann  discussed  it  under  the  names 
"short  code"  (programmer's  language)  and  "complete  code"  (machine 
language).19 

Von  Neumann  recognized  that  the  idea  of  automatic  programming 
is  a  practical  application  of  Turing's  proof  that  there  exists  a  universal 
computing  machine.  A  Turing  machine  is  a  finite  automaton  with  an 
indefinitely  expandable  tape.  Any  general  purpose  computer,  together 
with  an  automatic  factory  which  can  augment  its  tape  store  without 
limit,  is  a  Turing  machine.  Turing's  universal  computer  U  has  this 
property:  for  any  Turing  machine  M  there  is  a  finite  program  P  such 
that  machine  U,  operating  under  the  direction  of  P,  will  compute  the 
same  results  as  M.  That  is,  U  with  P  simulates  (imitates)  M. 

Automatic  programming  also  involves  simulation.  Let  Uc  be  a  com- 
puter which  operates  with  a  machine  language  inconvenient  for  the 

19  The  Computer  and  the  Brain,  pp.  70-73. 


editor's  introduction 




programmer  to  use.  The  programmer  uses  his  more  convenient  pro- 
grammer's language.  It  is  theoretically  possible  to  build  a  machine 
which  will  understand  the  programmer's  language  directly;  call  this 
hypothetical  computer  Mp  .  Let  Pt  be  the  program  (written  in  the 
language  of  machine  Uc)  which  translates  from  the  programmer's 
language  to  the  machine  language  of  Uc .  Then  Uc ,  operating  under 
the  direction  of  Pt  ,  will  compute  the  same  results  as  Mp  .  That  is, 
Uc  with  Pt  simulates  Mp ,  which  is  a  special  case  of  Turing's  uni- 
versal U  with  P  simulating  M. 

Note  that  two  languages  are  employed  inside  Uc  •  a  machine 
language  which  is  used  directly  and  a  programmer's  language  which 
is  used  indirectly  via  the  translation  routine  Pt .  Von  Neumann  re~ 
ferred  to  these  as  the  "primary"  and  "secondary"  language  of  the 
machine,  respectively.  The  primary  language  is  the  language  used  for 
communication  and  control  within  the  machine,  while  the  secondary 
language  is  the  language  we  humans  use  to  communicate  with  the 
machine.  Von  Neumann  suggested  that  by  analogy  there  may  be  a 
primary  and  secondary  language  in  the  human  nervous  system,  and 
that  the  primary  language  is  very  different  from  any  language  we 
know. 

Thus  the  nervous  system  appears  to  be  using  a  radically  different  system 
of  notation  from  the  ones  we  are  familiar  with  in  ordinary  arithmetics  and 
mathematics.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  whatever  language  the  central  nervous  system  is  using,  it  is  characterized 
by  less  logical  and  arithmetical  depth  than  what  we  are  normally  used  to. 

Thus  logics  and  mathematics  in  the  central  nervous  system,  when  viewed  as 
languages,  must  be  structurally  essentially  different  from  those  languages  to 
which  our  common  experience  refers.  ^ 

.  .  .  when  we  talk  mathematics,  we  may  be  discussing  a  secondary  language, 
built  on  the  primary  language  truly  used  by  the  central  nervous  system.20 

He  thought  that  the  primary  language  of  the  nervous  system  was 
statistical  in  character.  Hence  his  work  on  probabilistic  logics  was 
relevant  to  this  language.  See  his  discussion  of  probabilistic  logics 
and  reliability  in  the  Third  and  Fourth  Lectures  of  Part  I  below  and 
in  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms 
from  Unreliable  Components." 

Computer  Circuits.  From  the  beginning  von  Neumann  had  an  in- 
terest in  the  circuits  and  components  of  electronic  digital  computers. 


The  Computer  and  the  Brain,  pp.  79-82. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


He  analyzed  the  basic  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  matter 
with  the  purpose  of  developing  improved  computer  components.21  In 
his  lectures  on  automata  theory  he  compared  natural  and  artificial 
components  with  respect  to  speed,  size,  reliability,  and  energy  dis- 
sipation, and  he  computed  the  thermodynamic  minimum  of  energy 
required  for  a  binary  decision.  See  the  Fourth  Lecture  of  Part  I  of  the 
present  volume.  His  search  for  physical  phenomena  and  effects  that 
could  be  used  for  computing  led  to  his  invention  of  a  new  component. 

This  is  a  subharmonic  generator  which  is  driven  by  an  excitation 
(power)  source  at  frequency  nf  (n  =  2,  3,  4,  •  •  •)  and  which  oscillates 
at  the  subharmonic  frequency  f.22  The  subharmonic  generator  cir- 
cuit incorporates  an  inductance  and  capacitance  circuit  tuned  to  the 
frequency  /.  Either  the  capacitance  or  inductance  is  non-linear,  and 
its  value  varies  periodically  under  the  influence  of  the  exciting  signal 
(of  frequency  nf).  The  oscillation  at  frequency  /  can  occur  in  any  of  n 
distinct  phases.  Each  oscillation  phase  is  highly  stable  when  estab- 
lished, but,  when  the  oscillation  begins,  the  choice  of  phase  can  easily 
be  controlled  by  a  small  input  signal  of  frequency  /  and  of  the  desired 
phase.  Modulating  (turning  off  and  on)  the  exciting  source  (of  fre- 
quency nf)  with  a  square  wave  (clock  signal)  of  much  lower  frequency 
produces  alternate  passive  and  active  periods,  and  an  input  of  fre- 
quency /  can  select  one  of  the  n  phases  of  oscillation  as  the  exciting 
signal  appears. 

To  transfer  the  phase  state  of  one  subharmonic  generator  (a  trans- 
mitter) to  another  (a  receiver),  the  transmitter  and  receiver  are 
coupled  through  a  transformer.  The  square-wave  modulations  into 
transmitter  and  receiver  are  of  the  same  frequency  but  of  different 
phase,  so  that  the  transmitter  is  still  on  while  the  receiver  is  just 

21  Most  of  his  ideas  in  this  area  were  only  discussed  with  others  and  never 
published.  A  brief  reference  occurs  in  Preliminary  Discussion  of  the  Logical 
Design  of  an  Electronic  Computing  Instrument,  Collected  Works  5.39.  Booth, 
"The  Future  of  Automatic  Digital  Computers,"  p.  341,  mentions  a  supercon- 
ducting storage  element  discussed  with  von  Neumann  in  1947.  Von  Neumann 
also  did  some  early  work  on  the  MASER.  See  Collected  Works  5.420,  Scientific 
American  (February,  1963)  p.  12,  and  Scientific  American  (April,  1963)  pp. 
14-15. 

22  "Non-Linear  Capacitance  of  Inductance  Switching,  Amplifying  and 
Memory  Devices."  Von  Neumann's  ideas  are  also  described  by  Wigington,  "A 
New  Concept  in  Computing." 

The  parametron,  invented  independently  by  E.  Goto,  embodies  essentially 
the  same  idea,  but  is  far  different  in  the  suggested  speed  of  implementation.  See 
Goto,  "The  Parametron,  a  Digital  Computing  Element  which  Utilizes  Para- 
metric Oscillation."  The  highest  frequencies  Goto  reports  are  an  exciting  fre- 
quency (2/)  of  6  X  106  cycles  per  second  and  a  clock  frequency  of  105  cycles. 
According  to  Wigington,  op.  cit.y  von  Neumann  estimated  that  an  exciting  fre- 
quency (20  of  5  X  1010  and  a  clock  rate  of  109  were  feasible. 


editor's  introduction 




coming  on.  As  a  result  the  receiver  begins  oscillating  at  frequency  /  in 
phase  with  the  transmitter.  The  receiver  can  later  transmit  its  state 
to  another  subharmonic  generator,  and  so  on  down  the  line.  One  may 
use  three  clock  signals,  all  of  the  same  frequency  but  of  three  different 
phases,  and,  by  exciting  interconnected  generators  with  the  proper 
clock  signals,  transfer  information  around  a  system  of  generators. 
Each  such  generator  then  has  an  input  and  an  output  operating  at 
frequency/,  beside  the  exciting  input  of  frequency  nf;  the  phasing  of 
the  two  different  clock  signals  to  two  interconnected  generators  de- 
termines which  generator  is  the  receiver  and  which  is  the  transmitter. 
The  output  signal  (at/)  has  much  more  power  than  is  required  for  the 
input  signal  (at  /)  to  control  the  phase  of  the  oscillation,  and  so  the 
subharmonic  generator  is  an  amplifier  at  frequency  /,  the  power  for 
amplification  coming  from  the  exciting  signal  of  frequency  nf. 

Since  the  oscillation  of  the  subharmonic  generator  is  stable  and  con- 
tinues after  the  subharmonic  input  from  another  generator  terminates, 
the  device  clearly  has  memory  capacity.  Switching  can  also  be  done 
with  subharmonic  generators,  in  the  following  way.  Let  n  =  2;  i.e., 
let  there  be  two  distinct  phases  of  subharmonic  oscillation  at  frequency 
/,  so  that  the  system  is  binary.  Connect  the  outputs  of  three  trans- 
mitting generators  to  the  primary  of  a  transmitter  so  that  the  voltages 
of  these  outputs  add;  connect  a  receiver  generator  to  the  secondary 
of  this  transformer.  The  voltage  of  the  transformer  secondary  will  then 
have  the  phase  of  the  majority  of  the  transmitting  generators,  so  that 
the  receiving  generator  will  oscillate  in  this  phase.  This  arrangement 
realizes  a  majority  element,  that  is,  a  three-input  switch  with  delay 
whose  output  state  is  "1"  if  and  only  if  two  or  more  inputs  are  in 
state  "l".23  A  negation  element  may  be  realized  by  connecting  the 
output  of  one  generator  to  the  input  of  another  and  reversing  the 
direction  of  the  transformer  winding.  The  constants  "0"  and  "1"  are 
realized  by  sources  of  the  two  different  phases  of  the  signal  of  fre- 
quency /.  The  majority  element,  negation  element,  and  the  constant 
sources  "0"  and  "1"  are  sufficient  to  do  all  computing,  so  that  the 
central  part  of  a  computer  can  be  completely  constructed  from  sub- 
harmonic generators.24 

Von  Neumann's  Theory  of  Automata 

Introduction.  On  reviewing  the  preceding  sketch  of  von  Neumann's 
research  accomplishments,  one  is  immediately  struck  by  the  tremen- 

23  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from  Un- 
reliable Components, "  Collected  Works  5.339. 

24  Many  computers  are  so  constructed.  See  Goto,  op.  ext. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


dous  combination  of  breadth  and  depth  revealed  in  those  accomplish- 
ments. Particularly  notable  is  the  extent  to  which  von  Neumann's 
achievements  range  from  the  purely  theoretical  to  the  extremely 
practical.  It  should  be  added  in  the  latter  connection  that  he  was 
among  the  first  to  recognize  and  promote  the  tremendous  potentiali- 
ties in  computers  for  technological  revolution  and  the  prediction  and 
control  of  man's  environment,  such  as  the  weather. 

Von  Neumann  was  able  to  make  substantial  contributions  to  so 
many  different  fields  because  he  possessed  a  rare  combination  of  differ- 
ent abilities  along  with  wide  interests.  His  quick  understanding  and 
powerful  memory  enabled  him  to  absorb,  organize,  retain,  and  use 
large  quantities  of  information.  His  wide  interests  led  him  to  work  in 
and  keep  contact  with  many  areas.  He  was  a  virtuoso  at  solving  diffi- 
cult problems  of  all  kinds  and  at  analyzing  his  way  to  the  essence  of 
any  situation. 

This  wide  range  of  interests  and  abilities  was  one  of  von  Neumann's 
great  strengths  as  a  mathematician  and  made  him  an  applied  mathe- 
matician par  excellence.  He  was  familiar  with  the  actual  problems  of 
the  natural  and  engineering  sciences,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  ab- 
stract methods  of  pure  mathematics  on  the  other.  He  was  rare  among 
mathematicians  in  his  ability  to  communicate  with  scientists  and 
engineers.  This  combination  of  theory  and  practice  was  deliberately 
cultivated  by  von  Neumann.  He  was  a  careful  student  of  the  history  * 
and  nature  of  scientific  method  and  its  relation  to  pure  mathematics25 
and  believed  that  mathematics  must  get  its  inspiration  from  the 
empirical  sciences. 

Given  his  background  and  type  of  mind,  it  was  natural  for  von 
Neumann  to  begin  to  construct  a  general  theory  of  computers.  Being 
aware  of  the  important  similarities  between  computers  and  natural 
organisms,  and  of  the  heuristic  advantages  in  comparing  such  different 
but  related  systems,  he  sought  a  theory  that  would  cover  them  both. 
He  called  his  proposed  systematic  theory  the  "theory  of  automata." 
This  theory  of  automata  was  to  be  a  coherent  body  of  concepts  and 
principles  concerning  the  structure  and  organization  of  both  natural 
and  artificial  systems,  the  role  of  language  and  information  in  such 
systems,  and  the  programming  and  control  of  such  systems.  Von 
Neumann  discussed  the  general  nature  of  automata  theory  at  several 
places  in  Part  I  and  in  Chapter  1  of  Part  II  of  the  present  volume. 

Von  Neumann's  early  work  on  computer  design  and  programming 

25  See  Chapter  1  of  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behavior;  '  'The  Mathe- 
matician," Collected  Works  1.1-9;  and  "Method  in  the  Physical  Sciences," 
Collected  Works  6.491-498. 


editor's  introduction 


I!) 


led  him  to  recognize  that  mathematical  logic  would  play  a  strong  role 
in  the  new  theory  of  automata.  But  for  reasons  to  be  mentioned  later, 
he  thought  that  mathematical  logic  in  its  present  form,  though  useful 
in  treating  automata,  is  not  adequate  to  serve  as  "the"  logic  of  auto- 
mata. Instead,  he  believed  that  a  new  logic  of  automata  will  arise 
which  will  strongly  resemble  and  interconnect  with  probability  theory, 
thermodynamics,  and  information  theory.  It  is  obvious  from  all  this 
that  von  Neumann's  theory  of  automata  will,  in  the  beginning  at 
least,  be  highly  interdisciplinary. 

Unfortunately,  because  of  his  premature  death,  von  Neumann  was 
unable  to  put  in  final  form  any  of  the  research  he  was  doing  in  auto- 
mata theory.  In  his  last  work  on  this  subject  he  said  that  "it  would  be 
very  satisfactory  if  one  could  talk  about  a  'theory'  of  such  automata. 
Regrettably,  what  at  this  moment  exists  .  .  .  can  as  yet  be  described 
only  as  an  imperfectly  articulated  and  hardly  formalized  'body  of 
experience'."  26  Von  Neumann's  accomplishments  in  this  area  were 
nevertheless  substantial.  He  outlined  the  general  nature  of  automata 
theory:  its  structure,  its  materials,  some  of  its  problems,  some  of  its 
applications,  and  the  form  of  its  mathematics.  He  began  a  compara- 
tive study  of  artificial  and  natural  automata.  Finally,  he  formulated 
and  partially  answered  two  basic  questions  of  automata  theory:  How 
can  reliable  systems  be  constructed  from  unreliable  components? 
What  kind  of  logical  organization  is  sufficient  for  an  automaton  to  be 
able  to  reproduce  itself?  The  first  of  these  questions  is  discussed  in  his 
"Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from 
Unreliable  Components."  The  second  question  is  discussed  in  the 
Fifth  Lecture  of  Part  I  and  in  Part  II  of  the  present  volume. 

I  do  not  know  how  von  Neumann  was  led  to  these  two  problems, 
but  on  the  basis  of  his  interests  and  what  he  has  written  it  is  plausible 
that  they  arose  out  of  his  actual  work  with  computers  in  the  following 
way.  The  new  electronic  computers  were  revolutionary  because  in  con- 
trast to  earlier  computing  systems  (humans,  mechanical  and  electro- 
mechanical machines,  and  combinations  thereof)  they  could  do  large 
quantities  of  computation  automatically  and  rapidly.  The  advances 
through  the  ENIAC,  the  proposed  EDVAC,  and  the  Institute  for 
Advanced  Study  computer,  were  all  big  steps  in  the  direction  of  more 
powerful  computers.  His  interest  in  solving  non-linear  partial  differ- 
ential equations  in  general,  and  in  the  equations  for  predicting  the 
weather  in  particular,  would  naturally  lead  him  to  desire  ever  more 
powerful  machines  and  to  look  for  and  try  to  remove  the  basic  limita- 
tions blocking  the  construction  of  such  machines.  As  a  consultant  for 

26  The  Computer  and  the  Brain,  p.  2. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


government  and  industry  he  was  very  influential  in  promoting  the 
design  and  construction  of  larger  computers. 

Von  Neumann  compared  the  best  computers  that  could  be  built  at 
the  time  with  the  most  intelligent  natural  organisms  and  concluded 
that  there  were  three  fundamental  factors  limiting  the  engineer's  abil- 
ity to  build  really  powerful  computers:  the  size  of  the  available  com- 
ponents, the  reliability  of  these  components,  and  a  lack  of  a  theory  of 
the  logical  organization  of  complicated  systems  of  computing  ele- 
ments. Von  Neumann's  work  on  componentry  was  directed  toward 
the  first  limitation,  and  his  results  on  reliability  and  self -reproduction 
each  contribute  toward  removing  both  the  second  and  the  third  limita- 
tions. In  his  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Or- 
ganisms from  Unreliable  Components, "  he  gave  two  methods  of 
overcoming  the  unreliability  of  the  components,  not  by  making  them 
more  reliable,  but  by  organizing  them  so  that  the  reliability  of  the 
whole  computer  is  greater  than  the  reliability  of  its  parts.  He  regarded 
his  work  on  probabilistic  logics  as  a  step  in  the  direction  of  the  new 
logic  of  automata.  His  work  on  self -reproduction  also  belongs  to  the 
theory  of  complicated  automata.  He  felt  that  there  are  qualitatively 
new  principles  involved  in  systems  of  great  complexity  and  searched 
for  these  principles  in  the  phenomenon  of  self -reproduction,  which 
clearly  depends  on  complexity.  It  is  also  to  be  expected  that  because 
of  the  close  relation  of  self -reproduction  to  self -repair,  results  on  self- 
reproduction  would  help  solve  the  reliability  problem. 

Thus  von  Neumann  was  especially  interested  in  complex  automata; 
he  wanted  a  theory  of  the  logical  organization  of  complicated  systems 
of  computing  elements.  His  questions  about  reliability  and  self-repro- 
duction are  particularly  germane  to  complex  automata. 

Two  further  points  are  relevant.  First,  von  Neumann  believed  that 
in  starting  a  new  science  one  should  begin  with  problems  that  can  be 
described  clearly,  even  though  they  concern  everyday  phenomena  and 
lead  to  well  known  results,  for  the  rigorous  theory  developed  to  explain 
these  phenomena  can  provide  a  base  for  further  advances.27  His  prob- 
lems of  reliability  and  self-reproduction  are  of  this  kind.  Second,  von 
Neumann  believed  that  the  lack  of  an  adequate  theory  of  complicated 
automata  is  an  important  practical  barrier  to  building  more  powerful 
machines.  He  explicitly  stated  that  until  an  adequate  theory  of  auto- 
mata exists  there  is  a  limit  in  the  complexity  and  capacity  of  the 
automata  we  can  fabricate.28 

27  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behavior,  Sees.  1.3  and  1.4. 

28  '  'The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata,"  Collected  Works  5.302- 
306. 


editor's  introduction 




Natural  and  Artificial  Automata.  The  scope  of  the  theory  of  auto- 
mata and  its  interdisciplinary  character  are  revealed  by  a  considera- 
tion of  the  two  main  types  of  automata:  the  artificial  and  the  natural. 
Analog  and  digital  computers  are  the  most  important  kinds  of  artificial 
automata,  but  other  man-made  systems  for  the  communication  and 
processing  of  information  are  also  included,  for  example,  telephone 
and  radio  systems.  Natural  automata  include  nervous  systems,  self- 
reproductive  and  self -repairing  systems,  and  the  evolutionary  and 
adaptive  aspects  of  organisms. 

Automata  theory  clearly  overlaps  communications  and  control 
engineering  on  the  one  hand,  and  biology  on  the  other.  In  fact,  arti- 
ficial and  natural  automata  are  so  broadly  defined  that  one  can  legiti- 
mately wonder  what  keeps  automata  theory  from  embracing  both 
these  subjects.  Von  Neumann  never  discussed  this  question,  but  there 
are  limits  to  automata  theory  implicit  in  what  he  said.  Automata 
theory  differs  from  both  subjects  in  the  central  role  played  by  mathe- 
matical logic  and  digital  computers.  Though  it  has  important  engi- 
neering applications,  it  itself  is  a  theoretical  discipline  rather  than  a 
practical  one.  Finally,  automata  theory  differs  from  the  biological 
sciences  in  its  concentration  on  problems  of  organization,  structure, 
language,  information,  and  control. 

Automata  theory  seeks  general  principles  of  organization,  structure, 
language,  information,  and  control.  Many  of  these  principles  are 
applicable  to  both  natural  and  artificial  systems,  and  so  a  comparative 
study  of  these  two  types  of  automata  is  a  good  starting  point.  Their 
similarities  and  differences  should  be  described  and  explained.  Mathe- 
matical principles  applicable  to  both  types  of  automata  should  be 
developed.  Thus  truth-functional  logic  and  delay  logic  apply  to  both 
computer  components  and  neurons,  as  does  von  Neumann's  proba- 
bilistic logic.  See  the  Second  and  Third  Lectures  of  Part  I  of  the 
present  volume.  Similarly,  von  Neumann's  logical  design  of  a  self- 
reproducing  cellular  automaton  provides  a  connecting  link  between 
natural  organisms  and  digital  computers.  There  is  a  striking  analogy 
with  the  theory  of  games  at  this  point.  Economic  systems  are  natural; 
games  are  artificial.  The  theory  of  games  contains  the  mathematics 
common  to  both  economic  systems  and  games,29  just  as  automata 
theory  contains  the  mathematics  common  to  both  natural  and  artifi- 
cial automata. 

Von  Neumann  himself  devoted  considerable  attention  to  the  com- 
29  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behavior,  Sees.  1.1.2  and  4.1.3. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


parison  of  natural  and  artificial  automata.30  Scientific  knowledge  of 
the  automata  aspects  of  natural  organisms  has  advanced  very  rapidly 
in  recent  years,  and  so  there  is  now  a  much  more  detailed  basis  for  the 
comparison  than  at  the  time  von  Neumann  wrote,  but  his  general  ap- 
proach and  conclusions  are  nevertheless  of  interest.  We  will  outline 
his  reflections  under  the  following  headings:  (1)  The  analog-digital 
distinction,  (2)  the  physical  and  biological  materials  used  for  com- 
ponents, (3)  complexity,  (4)  logical  organization,  and  (5)  reliability. 

(1)  Von  Neumann  discussed  the  analog-digital  distinction  at  length 
and  found  it  to  be  an  illuminating  guide  in  his  examination  of  natural 
automata.  See  the  First  and  Fourth  Lectures  of  Part  I.  His  most 
general  conclusion  was  that  natural  organisms  are  mixed  systems,  in-L 
volving  both  analog  and  digital  processes.  There  are  many  examples, 
of  which  two  will  suffice  here.  Truth -functional  logic  is  applicable  to 
neurons  as  a  first  approximation,  but  such  neural  phenomena  as  re- 
fraction and  spatial  summation  are  continuous  rather  than  discrete. 
In  complicated  organisms  digital  operations  often  alternate  with 
analog  processes.  For  example,  the  genes  are  digital,  while  the  enzymes 
they  control  function  analogically.  Influenced  by  his  knowledge  of 
natural  automata  von  Neumann  proposed  a  combined  analog-digital 
computing  scheme.31  This  is  a  good  example  of  the  effect  of  the  study 
of  natural  systems  on  the  design  of  artificial  ones. 

(2)  Von  Neumann  compared  the  components  in  existing  natural 
and  artificial  automata  with  respect  to  size,  speed,  energy  require- 
ments, and  reliability,  and  he  related  these  differences  to  such  factors 
as  the  stability  of  materials  and  the  organization  of  automata.  Com- 
puter components  are  much  larger  and  require  greater  energy  than 
neurons,  though  this  is  compensated  for  in  part  by  their  much  greater 
speed.  These  differences  influence  the  organization  of  the  system: 
natural  automata  are  more  parallel  in  operation,  digital  computers 
more  serial.  Part  of  the  difference  in  size  between  a  vacuum  tube  and  a 
neuron  can  be  accounted  for  in  terms  of  the  mechanical  stability  of 
the  materials  used.  It  is  relatively  easy  to  injure  a  vacuum  tube  and 
difficult  to  repair  it.  In  contrast,  the  neuron  membrane  when  injured 
is  able  to  restore  itself.  Von  Neumann  calculated  the  thermodynamical 
minimum  of  energy  that  must  be  dissipated  by  a  computing  element 
and  concluded  that  in  theory  computing  elements  could  be  of  the 

30  Norbert  Wiener  also  made  valuable  comparisons  of  natural  and  artificial 
systems  in  his  Cybernetics,  though  in  a  somewhat  different  way.  The  two  men 
were  aware  of  each  others  work — see  Cybernetics  (particularly  the  "Intro- 
duction") and  von  Neumann's  review  of  it. 

31  Sec.  12  of  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms 
from  Unreliable  Components,"  Collected  Works  5.372-377. 


editor's  introduction 




order  of  1010  times  more  efficient  in  the  use  of  energy  than  neurons. 
See  the  Fourth  Lecture  of  Part  I.  His  comparison  of  natural  and 
artificial  components  no  doubt  influenced  his  work  on  computer  com- 
ponents. 

(3)  Man  is,  inter  alia,  a  natural  automaton  which  is  obviously  very 
much  more  complex  than  any  artificial  automaton  he  has  so  far  con- 
structed. Because  of  this  complexity  he  understands  the  details  of  his 
own  logical  design  much  less  than  that  of  the  largest  computer  he  has 
built.  Von  Neumann  thought  that  the  chief  problems  of  automata 
theory  center  around  the  concept  of  complexity.  This  very  concept 
needs  rigorous  definition.  Automata  theory  should  relate  the  logical 
organization  of  complex  automata  to  their  behavior.  A  theory  which 
did  this  would  enable  us  to  develop  the  logical  design  of  artificial 
automata  capable  of  carrying  out  some  of  the  most  difficult  and  ad- 
vanced functions  performed  by  humans  as  well  as  many  other  complex 
functions  that  humans  cannot  perform,  such  as  solving  large  systems 
of  non-linear  partial  differential  equations.  The  problem  of  reliability 
is  especially  crucial  in  complex  systems.  Von  Neumann  speculated 
that  extremely  complex  systems  involve  new  principles.  He  thought, 
for  example,  that  below  a  certain  level,  complexity  is  degenerative, 
and  self -reproduction  is  impossible.  He  suggested  that,  generally 
speaking,  in  the  case  of  simple  automata  a  symbolic  description  of  the 
behavior  of  an  automaton  is  simpler  than  the  automaton  itself,  but 
that  in  the  case  of  exceedingly  complex  automata  the  automaton  is 
simpler  than  a  symbolic  description  of  its  behavior.  See  the  Second 
Lecture  of  Part  I. 

(4)  In  discussing  the  relative  speeds  of  natural  and  artificial  com- 
ponents we  noted  that  natural  automata  tend  to  be  more  parallel  in 
operation  and  artificial  automata  tend  to  be  more  serial  in  operation. 
When  planning  an  automaton  or  a  computation,  one  can  choose  some- 
what the  extent  to  which  it  is  parallel  or  serial,  but  there  are  definite 
limits  to  this — e.g.,  in  a  serial  computation  a  later  operation  may 
depend  on  an  earlier  one  and  hence  cannot  proceed  simultaneously 
with  it.  Moreover,  this  choice  affects  other  aspects  of  the  machine, 
particularly  the  memory  requirements,  for  a  datum  that  is  to  be 
operated  on  later  must  be  stored  until  it  is  needed.  The  memory  of  an 
artificial  automaton  is  generally  organized  in  a  hierarchy,  different 
levels  of  the  hierarchy  operating  at  different  speeds.  In  a  typical  com- 
puter there  are  high-speed  electronic  registers,  slower  speed  magnetic 
cores,  and  much  slower  magnetic  tape  units.  In  addition  there  is  the 
wiring  of  the  machine  itself,  which  provides  the  unalterable  organiza- 
tion of  the  system.  Von  Neumann  discussed  machine  memory  hier- 




THEORY  OP  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


archies,  and  said  that  we  should  look  for  similar  hierarchies  in  natural 
automata.  Pulses  circulating  in  neuron  cycles,  the  change  of  neural 
thresholds  with  use,  the  organization  of  the  nervous  system,  and  the 
coding  of  the  genes  together  constitute  such  a  hierarchy. 

The  organization  of  an  automaton  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the 
organization  of  a  particular  computation  in  that  automaton.  When 
both  are  taken  into  account,  the  difference  between  natural  and 
artificial  automata  with  respect  to  serial  vs.  parallel  operation  seems 
to  be  accentuated.  Von  Neumann  spoke  in  this  connection  of  the 
"logical  depth"  of  a  computation.32  A  computation  consists  of  a  large 
number  of  basic  logical  steps  (switching  and  delay),  the  result  of  each 
step  depending  on  certain  prior  steps.  We  will  call  any  sequence  of 
steps,  each  of  which  depends  critically  on  its  predecessor,  a  "calcula- 
tion chain."  The  logical  depth  of  a  computation  is  the  number  of 
logical  steps  in  its  longest  calculation  chain.  Because  of  their  great 
speed,  digital  computers  are  used  to  perform  computations  of  exceed- 
ingly great  logical  depth.  For  the  final  answer  to  be  useful  its  error 
must  be  kept  small,  and  this  results  in  a  very  strong  reliability  require- 
ment on  each  logical  step.  This  brings  us  to  von  Neumann's  fifth  and 
last  main  point  of  comparison  between  natural  and  artificial  automata. 

(5)  The  first  electronic  digital  computers  had  little  equipment  for 
the  automatic  detection  of  failure.  They  were  designed  and  wired  with 
extreme  care  and  were  constructed  of  components  especially  selected 
for  great  reliability.  Programs  were  written  with  care  and  laboriously 
checked.  Diagnostic  programs  were  used  to  detect  machine  errors,  and 
various  procedures  (e.g.,  differencing)  were  employed  to  check  the 
computed  results.  Thus  these  machines  were  designed,  built,  and  used 
in  such  a  way  that,  hopefully,  a  single  malfunction  would  be  noted 
before  a  second  occurred.  The  machine  would  then  be  stopped  and  the 
fault  isolated  by  an  analytic  procedure.  As  von  Neumann  pointed  out 
in  the  Fourth  Lecture  of  Part  I,  this  method  of  handling  errors  would 
obviously  not  be  satisfactory  for  extremely  complicated  automata. 
The  very  design  and  construction  of  such  large  automata  would 
result  in  many  mistakes.  Moreover,  the  large  number  of  components 
would  result  in  a  very  short  mean  free  path  between  errors  and  make 
localization  of  failures  too  difficult.  Natural  automata  are  clearly 
superior  to  artificial  ones  in  this  regard,  for  they  have  strong  powers  of 
self -diagnosis  and  self -repair.  For  example,  the  human  brain  can  suffer 
great  damage  from  mechanical  injury  or  disease  and  still  continue  to 

32  The  Computer  and  the  Brain,  pp.  27,  79.  He  also  spoke  of  the  logical  depth 
of  a  language.  See  ibid.,  pp.  81-82  and  the  discussion  of  the  primary  language 
of  the  nervous  system  at  p.  15  above. 


editor's  introduction 




function  remarkably  well.  Natural  and  artificial  automata  are  thus 
organized  in  very  different  ways  for  protection  against  errors.  Von 
Neumann's  work  on  reliability  serves  to  link  these  two  types  of  autom- 
ata in  this  respect. 

Mathematics  of  Automata  Theory.  Von  Neumann  intended  the 
theory  of  automata  to  be  highly  mathematical  and  logical.  The  study 
of  actual  automata,  both  natural  and  artificial,  and  of  their  operation 
and  interaction,  provides  the  empirical  source  of  this  formal  compo- 
nent of  automata  theory.  This  is  in  keeping  with  von  Neumann's 
belief  that  mathematics  derives  inspiration  and  ideas  from  empirical 
subject  matter. 

The  close  connection  between  mathematical  logic  and  automata 
was  well  known  to  von  Neumann  when  he  wrote  on  automata  theory. 
Kurt  Godel  had  reduced  mathematical  logic  to  computation  theory 
by  showing  that  the  fundamental  notions  of  logic  (such  as  well-formed 
formula,  axiom,  rule  of  inference,  proof)  are  essentially  recursive 
(effective).33  Recursive  functions  are  those  functions  which  can  be 
computed  on  Turing  machines,  and  so  mathematical  logic  may  be 
treated  from  the  point  of  view  of  automata.34  Conversely,  mathe- 
matical logic  may  be  applied  to  the  analysis  and  synthesis  of  autom- 
ata. The  logical  organization  of  an  automaton  can  be  represented 
by  a  structure  of  idealized  switch-delay  elements  and  then  translated 
into  logical  symbolism.  See  the  Second  Lecture  of  Part  I. 

Because  of  the  intimate  connection  between  automata  and  logic, 
logic  will  be  at  the  heart  of  the  mathematics  of  automata  theory. 
Indeed,  von  Neumann  often  spoke  of  a  "logical  theory  of  automata" 
rather  than  merely  a  "theory  of  automata."  Nevertheless,  he  felt  that 
the  mathematics  of  automata  theory  would  also  have  some  formal 
characteristics  very  different  from  those  of  logic.  Roughly  speaking, 
mathematics  can  be  divided  into  the  discrete  and  the  continuous. 
Logic  is  a  branch  of  discrete  mathematics  and  is  highly  combinatorial. 
Von  Neumann  thought  that  automata  mathematics  should  be  closer 
to  the  continuous  and  should  draw  heavily  on  analysis.  He  thought 
that  the  specific  problems  of  automata  theory  require  this,  and  he  felt 
that  there  is  a  general  advantage  in  an  analytical  as  opposed  to  a 
combinatorial  approach  in  mathematics. 

There  is  an  important  topic  in  the  theory  of  automata  that  requires 

33  "Uber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia  Mathematica  und 
verwandter  Systeme  I."  The  notion  of  theoremhood  is  not  in  general  recur- 
sive, but  the  theorems  of  a  formal  language  are  always  recursively  enumerable. 

34  Turing,  "On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an  Application  to  the  Entschei- 
dungsproblem"  and  "Computability  and  X-Definability." 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


a  more  analytical  treatment  than  is  usual  in  logic.  Automata  theory 
must  encompass  the  probability  of  failure  of  a  component.  Mathe- 
matical logic  treats  only  the  perfect  or  deterministic  operation  of 
idealized  switch-delay  elements;  it  provides  no  theoretical  treatment 
of  error.  Hence  in  using  mathematical  logic  for  actual  design  one  must 
supplement  it  by  considerations  that  lie  outside  the  subject  itself. 
Von  Neumann  wanted  a  probabilistic  logic  which  would  handle  com- 
ponent malfunction  as  an  essential  and  integral  part  of  automata 
operation.  While  probability  theory  is  strongly  combinatorial,  it  also 
makes  important  contacts  with  analysis. 

Including  the  probability  of  failure  in  the  logic  of  automata  forces 
one  to  consider  the  size  of  a  computation.  The  usual  approach  in 
mathematical  logic  is  to  consider  whether  or  not  something  can  be 
accomplished  by  an  automaton  in  a  finite  number  of  steps,  regardless 
of  how  large  the  number  is.  But  on  any  realistic  assumption  about 
component  failure,  the  larger  the  calculation  the  more  likely  the 
machine  will  err  during  it,  and  the  less  Hkely  the  result  will  be  correct. 
This  concern  for  the  size  of  a  computation  also  arises  from  our  practi- 
cal interests  in  automata.  Computers  are  built  in  order  to  produce 
certain  results  in  the  available  time.  Since  many  of  the  functions  we 
desire  computers  to  perform  are  now  performed  by  humans,  it  should 
be  kept  in  mind  in  this  connection  that  man  is  a  finite  automaton,  not 
a  Turing  machine.  Von  Neumann  did  not  suggest  how  to  construct  a 
theory  of  the  sizes  of  computations.  Presumably  this  theory  would 
be  based  on  a  quantitative  notion  of  " amount  of  computation' '  which 
would  take  into  account  both  the  length  of  a  calculation  (the  "logical 
depth"  of  p.  24  above)  and  its  width  (the  amount  of  parallelism  in  it). 

Thus  a  theory  of  the  quantity  of  computation  and  the  likelihood  of 
its  being  wrong  must  include  continuous  as  well  as  discrete  mathe- 
matics. 

All  of  this  will  lead  to  theories  which  are  much  less  rigidly  of  an  all-or-none 
nature  than  past  and  present  formal  logic.  They  will  be  of  a  much  less  com- 
binatorial, and  much  more  analytical,  character.  In  fact,  there  are  numerous 
indications  to  make  us  believe  that  this  new  system  of  formal  logic  will  move 
closer  to  another  discipline  which  has  been  little  linked  in  the  past  with  logic. 
This  is  thermodynamics,  primarily  in  the  form  it  was  received  from  Boltz- 
mann,  and  is  that  part  of  theoretical  physics  which  comes  nearest  in  some  of 
its  aspects  to  manipulating  and  measuring  information.  Its  techniques  are 
indeed  much  more  analytical  than  combinatorial,  which  again  illustrates  the 
point  that  I  have  been  trying  to  make  above.85 

36  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata, "  Collected  Works  5.304. 
The  next  quotation  is  from  the  same  article,  5.303. 


editor's  introduction 




Von  Neumann  also  held  that  there  is  a  methodological  advantage 
in  employing  analysis  in  the  mathematics  of  automata. 

Everybody  who  has  worked  in  formal  logic  will  confirm  that  it  is  one  of  the 
technically  most  refractory  parts  of  mathematics.  The  reason  for  this  is  that 
it  deals  with  rigid,  all-or-none  concepts,  and  has  very  little  contact  with  the 
continuous  concept  of  the  real  or  of  the  complex  number,  that  is,  with  mathe- 
matical analysis.  Yet  analysis  is  the  technically  most  successful  and  best- 
elaborated  part  of  mathematics.  Thus  formal  logic  is,  by  the  nature  of  its 
approach,  cut  off  from  the  best  cultivated  portions  of  mathematics,  and 
forced  onto  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  mathematical  terrain,  into  combina- 
torics. 

This  comment  is  particularly  significant  since  von  Neumann  made 
important  contributions  to  discrete  mathematics.  In  Theory  of  Games 
and  Economic  Behavior  he  stated  that  the  mathematics  to  be  developed 
for  social  theory  should  emphasize  combinatorics  and  set  theory 
rather  than  differential  equations.36 

In  his  own  work  in  automata  theory  von  Neumann  moved  from  the 
discrete  toward  the  continuous.  His  probabilistic  logic  is  an  example. 
After  presenting  this  logic,  he  proposed  a  mixed  analog-digital  com- 
puting system  closely  related  to  it.37  His  first  models  of  self -reproduc- 
tion were  discrete,  but  he  hoped  later  to  develop  a  continuous  model 
of  self -reproduction.  See  Section  1.1.2.3  of  Part  II  of  the  present 
volume. 

We  noted  before  that  von  Neumann  often  referred  to  his  theory  of 
automata  as  a  "logical  theory  of  automata. "  He  also  called  it  "theory 
of  automata  and  information''  and  sometimes  just  "theory  of  infor- 
mation," indicating  the  strong  role  that  he  expected  information 
theory  to  play  in  the  subject.  He  divided  the  theory  of  control  and 
information  into  two  parts:  a  strict  part  and  a  probabilistic  part.  The 
rigorous  or  strict  part  includes  mathematical  logic  as  extended  to 
cover  finite  automata  and  Turing  machines.  The  statistical  or  proba- 
bilistic part  includes  the  work  of  Shannon  on  information  theory38  and 
von  Neumann's  probabilistic  logic.  Von  Neumann  regarded  his 
probabilistic  logic  as  an  extension  of  rigorous  logic. 

There  is  a  close  connection  between  information  theory  and  thermo- 
dynamics, both  subjects  employing  the  concept  of  probability  in  very 
much  the  same  way.  See  the  Third  Lecture  of  Part  I,  especially  the 
quotation  from  von  Neumann's  review  of  Wiener's  Cybernetics. 

36  Sec.  4.8.3.  Cf.  Sec.  1.2.5. 

37  Sec.  12  of  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms 
from  Unreliable  Components,"  Collected  Works  5.372-377. 

38  "A  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication." 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Von  Neumann  mentioned  two  further  connections  between  ther- 
modynamics and  automata  theory.  First,  he  found  an  analog  of  ther- 
modynamic degeneration  in  the  theory  of  self -reproducing  automata: 
below  a  certain  minimum  level,  complexity  and  degree  of  organiza- 
tion are  degenerative,  but  above  that  level  they  are  not  degenerative 
and  may  even  increase.  Second,  he  discussed  the  thermodynamic 
aspect  of  the  concept  of  balance  in  computing  machine  design.  The 
efficiency  of  a  computer  depends  on  the  proper  balance  of  its  different 
parts  with  respect  to  speed  and  size.  For  example,  in  the  memory 
hierarchy  the  different  kinds  of  memory  (e.g.,  transistor,  core,  tape) 
should  be  matched  to  one  another  in  size  and  speed.  A  computer  in 
which  the  arithmetic  unit  is  too  fast  for  the  memory,  or  the  memory  is 
too  small,  is  like  a  heat  engine  which  is  inefficient  because  large  tem- 
perature differences  exist  between  two  parts  of  it.  The  efficiency  of  a 
computer  must  be  defined  relative  to  its  environment  (i.e.,  the  prob- 
lems it  is  to  solve),  just  as  the  efficiency  of  a  heat  engine  depends  on 
its  environment.  These  problems  of  balance  and  matching  are  handled 
empirically  by  engineers.  Von  Neumann  wanted  a  quantitative  theory 
of  balance  akin  to  thermodynamics. 

To  conclude,  von  Neumann  thought  that  the  mathematics  of  auto- 
mata theory  should  start  with  mathematical  logic  and  move  toward 
analysis,  probability  theory,  and  thermodynamics.  When  it  is  devel- 
oped, the  theory  of  automata  will  enable  us  to  understand  automata 
of  great  complexity,  in  particular,  the  human  nervous  system.  Mathe- 
matical reasoning  is  performed  by  the  human  nervous  system,  and  the 
"primary"  language  in  which  mathematical  reasoning  takes  place  is 
analogous  to  the  primary  language  of  a  computing  machine  (p. 
15  above).  It  is  thus  quite  possible  that  automata  theory  will 
affect  logic  and  our  fundamental  concepts  of  mathematics. 

I  suspect  that  a  deeper  mathematical  study  of  the  nervous  system  .  .  .  will 
affect  our  understanding  of  the  aspects  of  mathematics  itself  that  are  in- 
volved. In  fact,  it  may  alter  the  way  in  which  we  look  on  mathematics  and 
logics  proper.39 

Now  logic  lies  at  the  foundation  of  mathematics;  therefore,  if  von 
Neumann's  suggestion  is  true,  automata  theory  will  move  full  circle: 
starting  at  the  foundation  of  mathematics  and  ending  there. 

Arthur  W.  Burks 

39  The  Computer  and  the  Brain,  p.  2;  cf.  pp.  70-82.  See  also  Ulam,  "John 
von  Neumann,  1903-1957,"  p.  12. 


part  One 


Theory  and  Organization  of 
Complicated  Automata 


EDITORIAL  NOTE 


[The  editor's  writing  is  in  brackets.  The  reconstructed  edition 
of  von  Neumann's  work  is  not  bracketed,  but  much  of  the  unbrack- 
eted  text  is  heavily  edited.  See  the  Preface.] 


First  Lecture 


COMPUTING  MACHINES  IN  GENERAL 


Conceptual  and  numerical  methods  in  mathematics.  The  role  of  the  latter 
in  applied  mathematics  and  in  mathematical  physics.  Their  role  in  pure 
mathematics.  The  situation  in  analysis.  Numerical  procedures  as  heuristic 
tools. 

Various  forms  of  the  numerical  approach:  Analog  and  digital. 

The  analog  procedure :  The  use  of  the  physical  experiment  as  a  substitute 
for  computing.  Analog  computing  machines. 

The  digital  procedure:  Manual  computing.  Simple  machines.  Fully  auto- 
matic computing. 

The  present  status  of  computing  machines.  Present  roles  of  analog  and 
digital  machines.  Questions  of  speed,  programming,  and  precision. 

The  concept  of  an  elementary  operation  in  a  computing  machine.  Its  role 
in  analog  machines  and  in  digital  machines.  Observations  on  analog  com- 
ponentry. Observations  on  digital  componentry. 

The  relay  organ.  Main  forms:  The  electro-mechanical  relay.  The  vacuum 
tube.  Other  possible  relay  organs. 

Measurement  of  the  length  or  complexity  of  a  numerical  calculation. 
Logical  and  arithmetical  operations.  Linear  and  non-linear  arithmetical 
operations.  The  role  of  the  number  of  multiplications.  Stability  of  the  statis- 
tical characteristics  of  various  parts  of  mathematics.  The  special  role  of 
analysis. 

Various  characteristic  levels  of  length  or  complexity.  Characteristic 
problem  lengths  for  automatic  digital  machines. 
Precision  requirements. 

Memory  requirements:  Measurement  of  memory  capacity.  The  decisive 
characteristics  of  a  memory:  Access  time  and  capacity.  Reasons  for  a  hier- 
archic organization  of  memory.  Actual  memory  requirements  of  an  automatic 
digital  machine. 

Input-output:  Main  available  media. 

The  concept  of  balance:  Speed  balance  of  various  components.  Balance 
between  memory  capacity  in  various  stages  of  the  hierarchy  and  speeds. 
Balance  between  speed  and  precision.  Balance  between  speed,  memory 
capacity,  and  programming  capacity. 

Thermodynamical  aspects  of  the  concept  of  balance.  Thermodynamical 
aspects  of  the  memory  capacity.  Need  for  a  quantitative  theory,  contrasted 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


with  the  present  empirical  procedures.  Preliminary  remarks  on  reliability  and 
errors. 

Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  to  thank  you  for  your  very  friendly 
welcome  on  my  five  occasions  to  talk  to  you,  and  I  hope  that  I  will  be 
able  to  offer  something  for  the  variety  of  interests  which  are  repre- 
sented here.  I  will  talk  about  automata — the  behavior  of  very  com- 
plicated automata  and  the  very  specific  difficulties  caused  by  high 
complication.  I  shall  discuss  briefly  the  very  plausible,  very  obvious 
analogies  which  come  to  mind  between  artificial  automata  and  or- 
ganisms, which  within  a  certain  limit  of  their  functioning  are  natural 
automata.  We  must  consider  the  similarities,  the  dissimilarities,  the 
extent  to  which  the  dissimilarities  are  due  to  our  skill  or  clumsiness 
(the  latter  being  the  more  normal  phenomenon),  and  the  extent  to 
which  these  dissimilarities  are  really  matters  of  principle. 

Today  I  will  talk  chiefly  about  artificial  automata,  and  specifically 
about  one  variety  of  artificial  automata,  namely,  computing  machines. 
I  will  talk  about  their  role  in  the  near  past  and  present  and  about  what 
to  expect  from  them  in  the  future. 

I  am  talking  about  computing  machines  partly  because  my  interests 
in  the  subject  of  automata  are  mathematical  and,  from  the  mathe- 
matical point  of  view,  computing  machines  are  the  most  interesting 
and  most  critical  automata.  But  quite  apart  from  this  ex  parte  argu- 
ment from  the  mathematical  side,  there  is  the  important  question  of 
automata  of  very,  very  high  complexity.  Of  all  automata  of  high  com- 
plexity, computing  machines  are  the  ones  which  we  have  the  best 
chance  of  understanding.  In  the  case  of  computing  machines  the 
complications  can  be  very  high,  and  yet  they  pertain  to  an  object 
which  is  primarily  mathematical  and  which  we  understand  better 
than  we  understand  most  natural  objects.  Therefore,  by  considering 
computing  machines,  we  can  discuss  what  we  know  and  what  we  do 
not  know,  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  and  what  the  limitations 
are,  much  more  clearly  than  if  we  discussed  other  types  of  automata. 
You  will  see  that  our  discussion  of  complex  automata  is  very  far  from 
perfect  and  that  one  of  our  main  conclusions  is  that  we  need  very 
badly  a  theory  which  we  do  not  at  this  moment  possess. 

Let  me  first  say  something  from  the  properly  mathematical  side, 
namely,  the  role  which  computing  machinery  has  played  or  might  play 
in  mathematics  and  in  adjacent  subjects.  Speaking  of  numerical  com- 
puting in  general,  it  is  not  necessary  to  discuss  what  role  it  can  play 
in  many  applications  of  mathematical  methods.  It's  perfectly  clear 
that  numerical  computing  plays  a  large  role  in  engineering.  If  more 


COMPUTING  MACHINES 




computing  and  faster  computing  could  be  done,  one  would  have  even 
more  uses  for  computing  in  engineering. 

Let  me  come  now  to  the  less  obvious  things.  In  physics,  particularly 
in  theoretical  physics,  it  is  clear  that  mathematical  methods  play  a 
great  role  and  that  to  a  large  extent  they  are  of  the  same  variety  as 
pure  mathematics,  that  is,  they  are  abstract  and  analytical.  However, 
effective  computing  plays  a  role  in  physics  which  is  larger  than  the 
role  one  would  expect  it  to  have  in  mathematics  proper.  For  instance, 
there  are  large  areas  of  modern  quantum  theory  in  which  effective 
iterative  computing  could  play  a  large  role.  A  considerable  segment  of 
chemistry  could  be  moved  from  the  laboratory  field  into  the  purely 
theoretical  and  mathematical  field  if  one  could  integrate  the  applicable 
equations  of  quantum  theory.  Quantum  mechanics  and  chemistry 
offer  a  continuous  spectrum  of  problems  of  increasing  difficulty  and 
increasing  complexity,  treating,  for  example,  atoms  with  increasing 
numbers  of  electrons  and  molecules  with  increasing  numbers  of 
valence  electrons.  Almost  any  improvement  in  our  standards  of  com- 
puting would  open  important  new  areas  of  application  and  would 
make  new  areas  of  chemistry  accessible  to  strictly  theoretical  methods. 

However,  I  will  not  go  into  great  detail  on  this  subject  either  but 
would  like  to  give  you  a  brief  indication  of  what  role  this  kind  of  com- 
puting might  play  in  mathematics  proper,  that  is,  in  pure  mathe- 
matics. In  pure  mathematics  the  really  powerful  methods  are  only 
effective  when  one  already  has  some  intuitive  connection  with  the 
subject,  when  one  already  has,  before  a  proof  has  been  carried  out, 
some  intuitive  insight,  some  expectation  which,  in  a  majority  of  cases, 
proves  to  be  right.  In  this  case  one  is  already  ahead  of  the  game  and 
suspects  the  direction  in  which  the  result  lies.  A  very  great  difficulty 
in  any  new  kind  of  mathematics  is  that  there  is  a  vicious  circle:  you 
are  at  a  terrible  disadvantage  in  applying  the  proper  pure  mathe- 
matical methods  unless  you  already  have  a  reasonably  intuitive 
heuristic  relation  to  the  subject  and  unless  you  have  had  some  sub- 
stantive mathematical  successes  in  it  already.  In  the  early  stages  of 
any  discipline  this  is  an  enormous  difficulty;  progress  has  an  auto- 
catalytic  feature.  This  difficulty  may  be  overcome  by  some  excep- 
tionally lucky  or  exceptionally  ingenious  performance,  but  there  are 
several  outstanding  instances  where  this  has  failed  to  happen  for  two, 
three,  or  four  generations. 

One  of  these  areas  which  has  been  conspicuous  for  some  time  is  the 
area  of  non-linear  problems.  The  great  successes  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  as  well  as  of  modern  analysis,  were  in  linear  problems.  We 
have  much  less  experience  with  non-linear  problems,  and  we  can  say 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


practically  nothing  about  the  majority  of  non-linear  partial  differ- 
ential equations.  We  have  never  been  successful  with  these  at  all,  and 
therefore  we  have  absolutely  no  idea  what  the  difficulties  are. 

In  those  few  domains  where  some  progress  had  been  made  it  was 
usually  for  different  reasons,  for  instance,  because  some  very  usual 
physical  phenomenon  was  tied  up  with  the  mathematical  problems 
and  therefore  one  had  a  non-mathematical,  physical  approach.  In 
these  domains  scientists  discovered  the  most  surprising  types  of  sin- 
gularities, which  have  absolutely  no  analogs  in  the  linear  domain  we 
know  so  well,  that  is,  absolutely  no  analogs  in  those  parts  of  mathe- 
matical analysis  like  complex  number  theory,  and  so  on.  These  experi- 
ences make  a  fairly  convincing  case  that  completely  new  methods  will 
be  needed  for  non-linear  problems.  The  classical  example  for  this  is  a 
non-linear  partial  differential  equation  for  compressible,  non-viscous 
flow,  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  phenomenon  of  shocks.  In  a 
problem  in  which  it  seemed  that  only  continuous  solutions  should 
exist,  discontinuous  solutions  suddenly  play  an  enormous  role,  and 
without  proper  regard  for  these  one  cannot  prove  the  uniqueness  or 
the  existence  of  solutions.  Furthermore,  these  irregular  solutions  be- 
have in  a  very  peculiar  manner  and  violate  a  number  of  the  regulari- 
ties which  we  had  reason  to  believe,  from  other  forms  of  analysis,  were 
well  established. 

Another  good  example  is  the  phenomenon  of  turbulence  in  the 
viscous  case,  where  one  suddenly  discovers  that  the  really  important 
solutions  to  a  problem  which  has  very  high  symmetry  do  not  possess 
that  symmetry.  From  a  heuristic  point  of  view,  the  important  thing 
is  not  to  find  the  simplest  solution  of  the  problem,  but  rather  to  ana- 
lyze statistically  certain  large  families  of  solutions  which  have  nothing 
in  common  with  each  other  except  certain  statistical  traits.  These 
prevalent  statistical  traits  are  the  real  roots  of  the  problem  and  cause 
very  peculiar  singularities  in  many  individual  solutions.  In  all  these 
cases  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  we  will  have  great  difficulty  in 
making  analytical  progress.  The  problem  of  turbulence  has  been 
around  for  60  years,  and  analytical  progress  in  solving  it  has  been  very 
small.1 

Almost  all  of  the  correct  mathematical  surmises  in  this  area  have 
come  in  a  very  hybrid  manner  from  experimentation.  If  one  could 
calculate  solutions  in  certain  critical  situations  like  those  we  have 
mentioned,  one  would  probably  get  much  better  heuristic  ideas.  I 

1  [  See  further  von  Neumann's  Collected  Works  5.2-5  and  Birkhoff's  Hydro- 
dynamics.] 


COMPUTING  MACHINES 




will  try  to  give  some  indications  of  this  later,  but  I  wanted  to  point 
out  that  there  are  large  areas  in  pure  mathematics  where  we  are 
blocked  by  a  peculiar  inter-relation  of  rigor  and  intuitive  insight,  each 
of  which  is  needed  for  the  other,  and  where  the  unmathematical 
process  of  experimentation  with  physical  problems  has  produced 
almost  the  only  progress  which  has  been  made.  Computing,  which  is 
not  too  mathematical  either  in  the  traditional  sense  but  is  still  closer 
to  the  central  area  of  mathematics  than  this  sort  of  experimentation 
is,  might  be  a  more  flexible  and  more  adequate  tool  in  these  areas  than 
experimentation. 

Let  me  come  to  the  subject  proper  and  first  say  a  few  things  about 
the  general  traits  of  computing  processes  and  computing  machines. 
As  you  probably  know,  the  main  types  of  computing  machines  exist- 
ing or  being  discussed  or  planned  at  this  moment  fall  into  two  large 
classes:  super-analog  devices  and  digital  devices.  Let  me  first  de- 
scribe the  analog  devices  or  the  wider  class,  inasmuch  as  a  proper 
definition  is  usually  given  for  the  digital  class,  and  analogs  are  essen- 
tially everything  else. 

Roughly  speaking,  an  analog  calculation  is  one  in  which  you  look 
at  some  physical  process  which  happens  to  have  the  same  mathemati- 
cal equations  as  the  process  you're  interested  in,  and  you  investigate 
this  physical  process  physically.  You  do  not  take  the  physical  process 
which  you  are  interested  in,  because  that  is  your  whole  reason  to  cal- 
culate. You  always  look  for  something  which  is  like  it  but  not  exactly 
the  same  thing. 

The  smallest  modification  you  may  make  is  to  use  a  different  scale, 
which  is  possible  in  certain  problems.  A  slightly  larger  modification 
is  to  use  a  different  scale  and  also  change  certain  things  which  are  not 
exactly  scales.  For  instance,  when  you  try  an  aerodynamical  experi- 
ment in  a  wind  tunnel  you  scale  it,  but  you  scale  not  only  the  linear 
dimensions  but  also  the  velocity  of  sound.  The  only  way  to  scale  the 
velocity  of  sound  is  to  go  to  a  lower  temperature,  and  there  you  really 
need  insight.  You  must  know  that  the  phenomenon  you're  concerned 
with  does  not  depend  on  temperature.  You  then  discover  that  it  is 
easier  to  try  it  at  a  lower  temperature  and  with  much  smaller  dimen- 
sions than  to  carry  out  the  actual  process  you  are  interested  in.  In  this 
way  a  wind  tunnel  for  aerodynamical  experimentation  is  in  a  sense  an 
analog  computing  device.  This  is  not  a  completely  fair  comparison 
because  a  wind  tunnel  does  a  good  deal  beside  computing,  but  still  in 
a  large  range  of  application  (which  is  certainly  not  much  less  than  50 
per  cent)  it  is  just  an  analog  computing  device. 

You  come  very  quickly  then  to  cases  in  which  you  will  not  do 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


exactly  this  because  it  is  not  possible  or  not  convenient  to  find  a  physi- 
cal process  which  has  exactly  the  same  equations  as  the  problem  you 
are  interested  in.  But  you  may  still  find,  for  example,  three  different 
processes  which  have  the  same  equations  as  three  parts  of  the  problem 
and  which  can  be  aligned  in  such  a  manner  that  if  you  perform  one 
after  the  other  you  get  the  complete  answer.  From  this  there  is  a  con- 
tinuous transition  to  situations  where  you  actually  break  up  the 
problem  mathematically  into  the  elementary  operations  of  arithmetic: 
multiplication,  addition,  subtraction,  and  division. 

[  Von  Neumann  next  discussed  physical  analog  processes  for  adding, 
multiplying,  subtracting,  and  dividing.  He  covered  both  electrical  and 
mechanical  analog  processes,  and  the  way  numbers  are  represented  in 
each.  He  said,  "What  passes  in  any  axiomatic  treatment  of  mathe- 
matics for  the  elementary  operations  of  arithmetic,  the  four  species 
of  arithmetical  addition,  subtraction,  etc.,  need  not  be  the  elementary 
operations  of  a  computing  machine,  specifically  of  an  analog  com- 
puting machine."  He  explained  how  a  differential  analyzer  multiplies 
two  constants  by  integrating  and  subtracting.  See  The  Computer  and 
the  Brain  8-5,  Collected  Works  5.293.] 

[  Von  Neumann  then  took  up  digital  machines.  He  remarked  that 
in  the  last  10  years  purely  digital  devices  had  become  relatively  much 
more  important  than  analog  devices.  He  discussed  the  components  of 
digital  machines  (toothed  wheels,  electromechanical  relays,  vacuum 
tubes,  and  nerve  cells),  the  speeds  of  these  components  (including  both 
response  time  and  recovery  time),  and  the  need  for  power  amplifica- 
tion in  these  components.  He  stressed  the  role  of  the  basic  logical 
operations  (such  as  sensing  a  coincidence)  in  control  mechanisms, 
including  "the  most  elaborate  control  mechanism  known,  namely,  the 
human  nervous  system."  See  The  Computer  and  the  Brain  7-10,  30, 
39-47.  He  next  turned  to  the  problem  of  measuring  the  complexity 
of  automata.] 

It  is  not  completely  obvious  how  to  measure  the  complexity  of  an 
automaton.  For  computing  machines,  probably  the  reasonable  way  is 
to  count  how  many  vacuum  tubes  are  involved.  This  is  somewhat 
ambiguous,  because  certain  current  types  of  vacuum  tubes  are  in 
reality  two  vacuum  tubes  inside  one  envelope,  in  which  case  one  is 
never  quite  sure  which  one  of  the  two  he  is  talking  about.  Another 
reason  is  that  a  great  deal  enters  into  computing  machine  circuitry 
aside  from  vacuum  tubes:  electrical  equipment  like  resistors,  capaci- 
tances, and  possibly  inductances.  Nevertheless,  the  ratio  of  these  to 
the  vacuum  tubes  is  tolerably  constant,  and  therefore  the  number  of 
tubes  is  probably  a  reasonable  measure  of  complexity. 


COMPUTING  MACHINES 




The  largest  calculating  machine  ever  used  to  date  contains  twenty 
thousand  vacuum  tubes.2  Now  the  design  of  this  machine  is  very 
different  from  what  any  vacuum  tube  machine  of  the  future  is  likely 
to  be  like,  and  so  this  machine  is  not  quite  typical.  The  computing 
machines  which  most  people  are  thinking  about  as  the  computing 
machines  of  the  immediate  future  are  to  be  smaller  than  this,  probably 
having  2  to  5  thousand  tubes.  So,  roughly  speaking,  the  order  of 
magnitude  of  the  complexity  of  these  machines  is  10  thousand. 

To  give  you  a  comparison  with  natural  organisms,  the  number  of 
nerve  cells  in  a  natural  organism  can  be  very  different  from  this.  The 
number  of  nerve  cells  in  the  human  central  nervous  system  has  been 
estimated  to  be  10  billion.  This  number  is  so  large  that  of  course  one 
has  absolutely  no  experience  with  such  orders  of  magnitude.  It's 
terribly  difficult  to  form  any  reasonable  guess  as  to  whether  things 
which  are  as  complex  as  the  behavior  of  a  human  being  can  or  cannot 
be  administered  by  10  billion  switching  organs.  No  one  knows  exactly 
what  a  human  being  is  doing,  and  nobody  has  seen  a  switching  organ 
of  10  billion  units;  therefore  one  would  be  comparing  two  unknown 
objects. 

Let  me  say  a  few  things  which  relate  more  specifically  to  computing 
machines.  If  you  can  repeat  an  elementary  act  like  switching  with  a 
vacuum  tube  1  million  times  per  second,  that  does  not  mean  of  course 
that  you  will  perform  anything  that  is  mathematically  relevant  1 
million  times  per  second.  In  estimating  how  fast  a  computing  machine 
can  operate,  there  are  all  kinds  of  standards.  There's  a  reasonable 
agreement  that  one  ought  to  count  the  number  of  multiplications 
performed  in  a  second.  By  multiplications  I  mean  the  multiplication 
of  two  full  sized  numbers  with  the  precision  with  which  the  machine 
is  running.  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  precision  with 
which  these  things  ought  to  run  is  of  the  order  of  10,  12,  or  14  decimal 
digits.  A  machine  of  reasonable  design  in  which  the  elements  have  a 
speed  of  about  1  million  per  second  will  probably  multiply  somewhere 
in  the  neighborhood  of  1  millisecond. 

No  matter  how  you  organize  a  computing  machine,  you  simply 
cannot  count  on  using  it  to  get  100  per  cent  efficiency.  By  that  I  mean 
that  it's  impossible,  with  our  present  information  on  the  subject,  to 
organize  the  machine  in  such  a  manner  that  a  multiplier  which  can 
multiply  in  one  thousandth  of  a  second  will  really  be  fed  the  necessary 

2  [  This  is  the  ENIAC,  which  is  described  in  Burks,  "Electronic  Computing 
Circuits  of  the  ENIAC"  and  "Super  Electronic  Computing  Machine,"  Gold- 
stine  and  Goldstine,  "The  Electronic  Numerical  Integrator  and  Computer 
(ENIAC),"  and  Brainerd  and  Sharpless,  "The  ENIAC."] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-KEPRODUCI  N(  J  AUTOMATA 


data  for  multiplication.  There  is  a  good  deal  else  to  be  done,  namely, 
making  up  your  mind  what  numbers  you  want,  getting  the  numbers, 
disposing  of  the  result,  deciding  whether  you  should  do  the  same  thing 
once  again  or  whether  you  should  do  something  else,  and  so  on.  This 
is  remarkably  similar  to  paper  pushing  and  adding  on  paper  directly, 
except  that  what  you're  pushing  is  not  on  paper. 

From  a  logical  point  of  view  the  efficiency  is  probably  of  the  order 
of  1  in  10  or  a  little  better.  By  that  I  mean  that  in  any  reasonable, 
logical  description  of  what  you  are  doing,  in  a  code  which  corresponds 
to  prevalent  procedures  in  formal  logics,  somewhere  between  a  fifth 
and  a  tenth  of  the  orders  will  be  orders  to  multiply.  Since  multiplica- 
tion is  somewhat  slower  than  the  other  operations,  in  what  most 
people  think  is  a  well  integrated,  well  balanced  machine,  you  will 
probably  spend  something  like  one  quarter  to  one  half  of  the  time 
multiplying.  So,  if  you  have  a  multiplier  which  can  effect  a  multiplica- 
tion in  1  millisecond,  you  are  doing  fairly  well  to  get  500  multiplica- 
tions per  second. 

In  human  computing  aided  by  a  desk  machine  the  same  number  will 
be  perhaps,  2  multiplications  per  minute.  So  the  discrepancy,  the 
acceleration  factor  could  probably  be  pushed  to  100  thousand  or 
something  like  that.  But  to  get  out  of  this  range  we'll  probably  have 
to  depart  from  present  techniques  quite  radically. 

From  the  mathematical  point  of  view  the  question  arises  whether 
anything  could  be  done  with  this  speed  if  one  had  it.  I  would  like  to 
point  out  very  emphatically  that  there  are  very  good  reasons  for 
asking  for  anything  the  traffic  will  bear,  for  this  speed,  10  times  more, 
a  hundred  times,  a  thousand  times,  or  a  million  times.  Problems  there 
are  good  reasons  to  solve  would  justify  a  great  deal  more  speed  than 
anyone  can  think  of  at  this  moment.  [Von  Neumann  gave  as  examples 
quantum  mechanical  calculations  on  atomic  and  molecular  wave 
functions  (where  the  combinatorial  difficulties  go  up  very  fast  as 
the  number  of  electrons  goes  up) ,  and  the  problem  of  turbulence.] 

Although  it  doesn't  belong  strictly  to  the  subject,  let  me  point  out 
that  we  will  probably  not  want  to  produce  vast  amounts  of  numerical 
material  with  computing  machines,  for  example,  enormous  tables  of 
functions.  The  reason  for  using  a  fast  computing  machine  is  not  that 
you  want  to  produce  a  lot  of  information.  After  all,  the  mere  fact  that 
you  want  some  information  means  that  you  somehow  imagine  that 
you  can  absorb  it,  and,  therefore,  wherever  there  may  be  bottlenecks 
in  the  automatic  arrangement  which  produces  and  processes  this 
information,  there  is  a  worse  bottleneck  at  the  human  intellect  into 
which  the  information  ultimately  seeps. 


COMPUTING  MACHINES 




The  really  difficult  problems  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the  number  of 
data  which  enter  is  quite  small.  All  you  may  want  to  know  is  a  few 
numbers,  which  give  a  rough  curve,  or  one  number.  All  you  may  want 
in  fact  is  a  "yes"  or  a  "no,"  the  answer  as  to  whether  something  is  or 
is  not  stable,  or  whether  turbulence  has  or  has  not  set  in.  The  point  is 
that  you  may  not  be  able  to  get  from  an  input  of,  say,  80  numbers  to 
an  output  of  20  numbers  without  having,  in  the  process,  produced  a 
few  billion  numbers  in  which  nobody  is  interested.  But  the  process  is 
such  that  the  volume  of  numerical  material  handled  first  expands  and 
then  contracts  again,  and,  while  it  starts  on  a  low  level,  say  with  100 
numbers,  and  ends  on  a  low  level,  say  with  10  numbers,  its  maximum 
in  between  is  large,  say  a  few  thousand,  and  the  number  of  successive 
generations  is  large,  so  that  you  have  handled  10  billion  numbers 
before  you  are  through.  These  figures  are  quite  realistic;  it  would  be 
easy  to  find  problems  which  have  about  this  numerical  makeup. 

You  may  have  noticed  that  I  have  already  introduced  one  distinc- 
tion, namely,  the  total  numerical  material  produced  in  a  process.  The 
other  thing  which  matters  is  how  much  you  need  simultaneously. 
This  is  probably  the  most  vexing  problem  in  modern  computing 
machine  technology.  It's  also  quite  a  problem  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  human  organism,  namely,  the  problem  of  memory.  You  see, 
all  these  automata  really  consist  of  two  important  parts:  the  general 
switching  part  (an  active  part  which  affects  the  logical  operations 
the  automaton  is  supposed  to  perform),  and  the  memory  (which 
stores  information,  chiefly  intermediate  results  which  are  needed  for 
a  while  and  are  then  discarded  and  replaced  by  others) . 

In  computing  machines,  the  methods  to  do  the  active  part,  the 
arithmetical  and  control  circuits,  have  been  well  known  for  years. 
The  memory  questions  were  much  more  critical  and  much  more  open 
throughout  the  last  decade,  and  are  even  more  critical  and  more  open 
now.  In  the  human  organism,  we  know  that  the  switching  part  is 
composed  of  nerve  cells,  and  we  know  a  certain  amount  about  their 
functioning.  As  to  the  memory  organs,  we  haven't  the  faintest  idea 
where  or  what  they  are.  We  know  that  the  memory  requirements  of 
the  human  organism  are  large,  but  on  the  basis  of  any  experience 
that  one  has  with  the  subject,  it's  not  likely  that  the  memory  sits  in 
the  nervous  system,  and  it's  really  very  obscure  what  sort  of  thing  it 
is.3  Hence  in  both  the  computer  and  the  human  nervous  system,  the 
dynamic  part  (the  switching  part)  of  the  automaton  is  simpler  than 
the  memory. 

3  [  This  point  is  discussed  further  in  The  Computer  and  the  Brain  63-69.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


[  Von  Neumann  next  discussed  how  to  measure  memory  capacity. 
He  suggested  using  the  logarithm  (to  the  base  two)  of  the  configura- 
tion number  (i.e.,  the  number  of  alternatives).  See  Collected  Works 
5.341-342.  He  then  estimated  the  memory  capacity  of  an  ordinary 
printed  page  to  be  about  20  thousand  units,  and  remarked  that  this 
is  about  the  memory  capacity  of  the  digital  computers  under  con- 
sideration at  that  time.] 

This  shows  where  the  real  price  of  speed  lies.  A  large  modern  com- 
puting machine  is  a  very  expensive  object,  an  object  which  it  takes 
a  long  time  to  build  and  which  is  a  very  tricky  thing  after  you've  got 
it.  Yet  it  is  supposed  to  get  along  on  a  memory  which  is  equivalent  to 
a  printed  page!  When  such  a  machine  is  properly  run  it  will,  in  half 
an  hour,  do  the  work  which  a  computing  group  of  20  people  would  do 
in  about  2  or  3  years.  Yet  it's  supposed  to  get  along  on  a  memory  of 
one  printed  page.  Imagine  that  you  take  20  people,  lock  them  up  in 
a  room  for  3  years,  provide  them  with  20  desk  multipliers,  and  in- 
stitute this  rule:  during  the  entire  proceedings  all  of  them  together 
may  never  have  more  than  one  page  written  full.  They  can  erase  any 
amount,  put  it  back  again,  but  they  are  entitled  at  any  given  time 
only  to  one  page.  It's  clear  where  the  bottleneck  of  this  process  lies. 
The  planning  may  be  difficult,  input  and  output  may  be  cumbersome, 
and  so  on,  but  the  main  trouble  is  that  it  has  a  phenomenally  low 
memory  for  the  computing  to  be  done.  The  whole  technique  of  com- 
puting will  be  completely  distorted  by  this  modus  operandi. 

This  is  an  extremely  abnormal  economy.  By  going  to  high  speed,'- 
you  cut  yourself  off  from  the  efficient  methods  of  storing  information 
and  push  yourself  into  an  inefficient  one.  A  thousand-number  com- 
puter memory  is  a  very  large  object,  an  object  which  it  took  years 
to  develop ;  all  existing  types  are  very  much  in  an  experimental  stage 
at  this  moment,  and  none  of  them  are  small  or  cheap.  Yet  they  are 
the  equivalent  of  one  printed  page.  The  reason  why  one  is  forced  to 
use  these  memories  is  this.  [Each  multiplication  requires  certain  num- 
bers from  the  memory  and  the  product  often  goes  to  the  memory. 
There  are  other  arithmetic  operations,  and  these  require  access  to 
the  memory.  The  orders  to  control  these  arithmetic  operations  come 
from  the  memory.]  One  probably  needs  anywhere  between  five  and 
eight  accesses  to  the  memory  for  each  multiplication.  Thus  it  is  un- 
reasonable to  get  a  millisecond  multiplier  unless  you  have  a  memory 
to  which  you  can  get  access  in  something  of  the  order  of  a  tenth  of 
a  millisecond.  Now  to  get  access  to  a  printed  book  takes  seconds,  to 
get  access  to  anything  punched  or  written  on  paper  takes  a  fraction 
of  a  second.  Since  one  needs  an  access  time  of  something  like  one 


COMPUTING  MACHINES 


II 


ten-thousandth  of  a  second,  one  is  forced  out  of  these  efficient  tech- 
niques of  storing  information,  into  a  highly  inefficient  and  expensive 
technique. 

In  comparing  artificial  with  natural  automata  there  is  one  very 
important  thing  we  do  not  know:  whether  nature  has  ever  been  sub- 
ject to  this  handicap,  or  whether  natural  organisms  involve  some 
much  better  memory  device.  That  the  secondary  memory  devices 
which  humans  have  developed,  namely,  libraries,  etc.,  are  so  vastly 
more  efficient  than  this,  is  some  reason  to  suspect  that  natural  mecha- 
nisms for  memory  may  also  be  quite  as  clumsy  as  the  high  speed 
memories  with  which  we  think  we  have  to  operate.  But  we  know 
practically  nothing  about  this. 

Let  me,  before  I  close  today,  mention  one  more  thing.  In  any  fast 
machine  the  memory  you  need  is  characterized  by  two  data:  the 
capacity  and  the  access  time.  [Von  Neumann  said  that  at  that  mo- 
ment there  was  no  technique  for  building  a  memory  with  both  an 
adequate  capacity  and  a  sufficiently  good  access  time.  What  is  done 
is  to  construct  a  hierarchy  of  memories.  The  first  memory  has  the 
required  speed  and  is  as  large  as  you  can  make  it,  but  it  is  not  large 
enough.  The  second  memory  is  much  larger,  but  slower.  Numbers 
are  transferred  from  the  second  memory  to  the  first  memory  when 
needed.  There  may  be  a  third  memory  which  is  larger  but  slower,  and 
so  on.  An  electrostatic  memory  tube,  a  magnetic  tape,  and  a  card 
file  would  constitute  such  a  hierarchy  of  memories.  See  The  Computer 
and  the  Brain  33-37.] 


Second  Lecture 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL 
AND  INFORMATION 


Theory  of  information:  The  strict  part.  The  concept  of  information.  The 
corresponding  mathematical-logical  concept  of  sets  and  partitions. 

Close  connection  with  formal  logics.  Alternative  approach  by  way  of 
model-automata.  Common  traits  in  these  two  approaches:  All-or-none  char- 
acter. The  work  which  connects  these  two  approaches. 

Methods  of  describing  automata :  Syntheses  from  components  or  treatment 
as  a  whole. 

Synthetic  approach:  Nature  of  the  element-organs.  Their  similarity  to 
neurons.  The  program  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts:  Formal  neural  networks.  Their 
main  result. 

Treatment  as  a  whole:  Turing's  theory  of  automata.  The  relationship  of 
an  automaton  and  of  the  mathematical  problems  that  can  be  solved  with  its 
help.  The  concept  of  a  universal  automaton.  Turing's  main  result. 

Limitations  of  the  McCulloch-Pitts  and  Turing  automata.  Input  and  out- 
put organs.  Generalizations  of  these.  Interpretation  as  sensor  and  motor 
organs. 

[  Von  Neumann  said  that  there  are  two  parts  to  information  theory: 
the  rigorous  and  the  probabilistic.  The  probabilistic  part  is  probably 
more  important  for  modern  computing  machinery,  but  the  rigorous 
part  is  a  necessary  preliminary  to  it.  The  rigorous  part  of  information 
theory  is  just  a  different  way  of  dealing  with  formal  logics.] 

[  He  then  explained  some  of  the  basic  ideas  of  formal  logics.  He  dis- 
cussed briefly  truth-functional  connectives  such  as  "and,"  "not," 
"if  .  .  .  then,"  and  "not  both,"  and  their  interdefinability.  He  ex- 
plained the  idea  of  a  variable  and  the  quantifiers  "all"  and  "some." 
He  concluded:  "If  you  have  this  machinery  you  can  express  anything 
that  is  dealt  with  in  mathematics;  or  that  is  dealt  with  in  any  subject, 
for  that  matter,  as  long  as  it's  dealt  with  sharply."] 

I  am  not  going  to  go  into  this  subject,  because  in  order  to  make  a 
theory  of  information,  another  machinery  which  is  quite  closely  re- 
lated to  this  but  looks  somewhat  different,  is  more  cogent.  This  is  con- 




RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL  AND  INFORMATION  43 

nected  with  the  work  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts,1  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  logician  Turing  on  the  other.2  Both  endeavors  in  the  subject 
replace  formal  logics  as  indicated  here  and  as  classically  pursued,  by 
the  discussion  of  certain  fictitious  mechanisms  or  axiomatic  paper 
automata,  which  are  merely  outlined,  but  which  nobody  is  particularly 
concerned  to  build.  Both  of  them  show  that  their  fictitious  mecha- 
nisms are  exactly  co-extensional  with  formal  logics;  in  other  words, 
that  what  their  automata  can  do  can  be  described  in  logical  terms 
and,  conversely,  that  anything  which  can  be  described  rigorously  in 
logical  terms  can  also  be  done  by  automata.  [Von  Neumann  was  as- 
suming that  a  finite  McCulloch-Pitts  neuron  net  is  supplied  with  an 
infinite  blank  tape.  The  result  to  which  he  referred  is  the  equivalence 
of  Turing  computability,  X-definability,  and  general  recursiveness. 
See  Turing's  "Computability  and  X-Definability."] 

I'm  going  to  describe  both  the  work  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts  and 
the  work  of  Turing,  because  they  reflect  two  very  important  ways  to 
get  at  the  subject:  the  synthetic  way,  and  the  integral  way.  McCulloch 
and  Pitts  described  structures  which  are  built  up  from  very  simple 
elements,  so  that  all  you  have  to  define  axiomatically  are  the  ele- 
ments, and  then  their  combination  can  be  extremely  complex.  Turing 
started  by  axiomatically  describing  what  the  whole  automaton  is 
supposed  to  be,  without  telling  what  its  elements  are,  just  by  describ- 
ing how  it's  supposed  to  function. 

The  work  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts  was  definitely  meant  as  a  simple 
mathematical,  logical  model  to  be  used  in  discussions  of  the  human 
nervous  system.  That  it  wound  up  with  something  which  is  actually 
an  equivalent  of  formal  logics  is  very  remarkable  and  was  part  of  the 
point  McCulloch  and  Pitts  wanted  to  drive  home,  but  only  part  of 
that  point.  Their  model  also  has  a  meaning  which  concerns  me  at  this 
moment  a  little  less,  but  about  which  I  will  tell,  without  immediately 
stating  where  it  ties  in  to  formal  logics.  They  wanted  to  discuss 
neurons.  They  took  the  position  that  they  did  not  want  to  get  tied  up 
in  the  physiological  and  chemical  complexities  of  what  a  neuron  really 
is.  They  used  what  is  known  in  mathematics  as  the  axiomatic  method, 
stating  a  few  simple  postulates  and  not  being  concerned  with  how 
nature  manages  to  achieve  such  a  gadget. 

1  [  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  "A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent  in 
Nervous  Activity. "  See  also  Sees.  1-7  of  von  Neumann,  "Probabilistic  Logics 
and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from  Unreliable  Components, "  Burks 
and  Wright,  "Theory  of  Logical  Nets,"  and  Kleene,  "Representation  of  Events 
in  Nerve  Nets  and  Finite  Automata."] 

2  [  Turing,  "On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an  Application  to  the  Entschei- 
dungsproblem."] 


it 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


They  went  one  step  further.  This  has  been  emphasized  very  strongly 
by  those  who  criticize  their  work,  although  it  seems  to  me  that  the 
extent  to  which  they  went  further  can  be  justified.  They  said  that  they 
did  not  want  to  axiomatize  the  neuron  as  it  actually  exists,  but  they 
wanted  to  axiomatize  an  idealized  neuron,  whictiJs-jjiuch  simpler 
than  the_rSxl,_one.  They  believed  that  the  extremely  amputated, 
simplified,  idealized  object  which  they  axiomatized  possessed  the 
essential  traits  bf  the  neuron,  and  that  all  else  are  incidental  complica- 
tions, which  in  a  first  analysis  are  better  forgotten.  Now,  I  am  quite 
sure  that  it  will  be  a  long  t  ime  before  this  point  is  generally  agreed  to 
by  everybody,  if  ever;  namely,  whether  or  not  what  one  overlooks 
in  this  simplification  had  really  better  be  forgotten  or  not.  But  it's 
certainly  true  that  one  gets  a  quick  understanding  of  a  part  of  the 
subject  by  making  this  idealization. 

The  definition  of  what  we  call  a  neuron  is  this.  One  should  perhaps 
call  it  a  formal  neuron,  because  it  certainly  is  not  the  real  thing,  though 
it  has  a  number  of  the  essential  traits  of  the  real  thing.  A  neuron  will 
be  symbolically  designated  by  a  circle,  which  symbolizes  the  body  of 
the  neuron,  and  a  line  branching  out  from  the  circle,  which  symbolizes 
the  axon  of  the  neuron.  An  arrow  is  used  to  indicate  that  the  axon 
of  one  neuron  is  incident  on  the  body  of  another.  A  neuron  has  two 
states:  it's  excited  or  not.  As  to  what  excitation  is,  one  need  not  tell. 
Its  main  characteristic  is  its  operational  characteristic  and  that  has  a 
3ertain  circularity  about  it:  its  main  trait  is  that  it  can  excite  other 
neurons.  Somewhere  at  the  end  of  an  involved  network  of  neurons 
the  excited  neuron  excites  something  which  is  not  a  neuron.  For 
instance,  it  excites  a  muscle,  which  then  produces  physical  motion;  or 
it  excites  a  gland  which  can  produce  a  secretion,  in  which  case  you  get 
a  chemical  change.  So,  the  ultimate  output  of  the  excited  state  really 
produces  phenomena  which  fall  outside  our  present  treatment.  These 
phenomena  will,  for  the  sake  of  the  present  discussion,  be  entirely 
disregarded. 

[Von  Neumann  stated  the  axioms  governing  the  interaction  of 
neurons.  Following  McCulloch  and  Pitts  he  assumed  a  uniform  delay 
and  for  the  time  being  disregarded  "the  important  phenomenon  of 
fatigue,  the  fact  that  after  a  neuron  has  been  excited  it  is  not  usable 
for  a  while. "  Fatigue  plays  an  important  role  in  the  functioning  of  an 
organism  (see  p.  48  below),  but  in  spite  of  fatigue  one  can  get  con- 
tinuous action  by  using  a  chain  of  neurons,  each  feeding  its  successor. 
Von  Neumann  defined  the  threshold  of  a  neuron  and  introduced 
inhibitory  synapses,  symbolized  by  a  circle  (instead  of  an  arrowhead).] 

[Von  Neumann  next  presented  what  he  called  "the  important 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL  AND  INFORMATION  45 

result  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts."  Imagine  a  black  box  with  a  number 
of  inputs  and  a  single  output.  Select  two  times,  ti  and  t2 .  Specify 
which  patterns  of  inputs  from  time  t\  to  time  U  are  to  produce  an 
output  and  which  are  not.]  No  matter  how  you  formulate  your  condi- 
tions, you  can  always  put  a  neural  network  in  the  box  which  will 
realize  these  conditions,  which  means  that  the  generality  of  neural 
systems  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  generality  of  logics.  The  fact  that 
something  has  been  done  with  the  system  means  not  more  and  not 
less  than  you  know  what  you  are  talking  about,  that  you  can  state  it 
in  a  finite  number  of  words  unambiguously  and  rigorously.  I  will  not 
attempt  to  give  the  proof,  which  like  all  proofs  in  formal  logics  is  not 
quite  easy  to  render.  [We  will  sketch  the  proof  very  briefly.  It  follows 
from  the  construction  that  von  Neumann  referred  to  that  every  switch- 
ing function  (truth  function,  Boolean  function)  can  be  realized  by  a 
neural  network  with  some  fixed  delay.  A  cyclic  neural  memory  of 
arbitrary  finite  capacity  can  be  attached  to  this  switching  net.  When 
this  composite  network  is  augmented  by  an  infinite  tape,  the  result  is 
a  Turing  machine.  Moreover,  corresponding  to  each  Turing  machine 
M ,  there  is  a  network  of  this  kind  which  computes  the  same  number 
as  M.] 

[  Von  Neumann  showed  how  to  construct  a  few  sample  networks. 
The  first  is  a  network  in  which  a  dominates  6,  b  dominates  c,  but  c 
dominates  a,  shown  in  Figure  1.  Each  neuron  is  excited  (fires)  if  it  is 
stimulated  on  its  excitatory  input  (the  input  with  an  arrow)  but  is 
not  stimulated  on  its  inhibitory  input  (the  input  with  a  small  circle) . 
Hence  if  a  and  b  are  both  stimulated,  output  a  will  be  active  but  not 
/5;  if  b  and  c  are  both  stimulated,  output  0  will  be  active  but  not  7; 
while  if  a  and  c  are  both  stimulated,  output  7  will  be  active  but  not  a. 
Von  Neumann  used  this  network  to  illustrate  a  certain  point.  People 
have  made  statements  about  the  non-quantitative  character  of 
human  behavior,  which  statements  seem  to  imply  that  in  any  quanti- 
tative mechanism,  if  a  is  stronger  than  b  and  b  is  stronger  than  c, 
then  a  is  stronger  than  c.  But  in  the  above  neural  network  a  is  stronger 
than  b  and  b  is  stronger  than  c,  while  c  is  stronger  than  a.] 

[  Von  Neumann  then  synthesized  a  number  of  other  networks : 
simple  memories,  counters,  and  an  elementary  learning  circuit.  These 
are  approximately  the  circuits  of  Collected  Works  5.342-345.  The 
learning  circuit  has  two  inputs,  a  and  6.  It  counts  the  number  of  times 
a  stimulus  of  a  is  followed  by  a  stimulus  of  b.  When  this  number 
reaches  256,  the  circuit  emits  a  pulse  whenever  b  is  stimulated,  inde- 
pendently of  whether  a  is  stimulated  or  not.]  You  see  that  you  can 
produce  circuits  which  look  complicated,  but  which  are  actually  quite 


4G  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

simple  from  the  point  of  view  of  how  they  are  synthesized  and  which 
have  about  the  same  complexity  that  they  should  have,  namely,  the 
complexity  that  grammar  has.  It  is  no  more  difficult  to  make  this 
drawing  up  than  to  make  up  a  sentence  which  describes  what  you 
want,  and  the  essence  of  the  result  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts  is  that 
there  really  isn't  much  difference  between  the  two  things.  The  rigorous 
verbal  description  is  co-extensive  with  the  description  in  terms  of 
relay  organs. 

May  I  point  out  what  follows  from  this  from  a  philosophical  point 
of  view,  and  what  does  not  follow.  It  certainly  follows  that  anything 
that  you  can  describe  in  words  can  also  be  done  with  the  neuron 
method.  And  it  follows  that  the  nerves  need  not  be  supernaturally 
clever  or  complicated.  In  fact,  they  needn't  be  quite  as  clever  and 
complicated  as  they  are  in  reality,  because  an  object  which  is  a  con- 
siderably amputated  and  emasculated  neuron,  which  has  many  fewer 
attributes  and  responds  in  a  much  more  schematic  manner  than  a 
neuron,  already  can  do  everything  you  can  think  up. 

What  is  not  demonstrated  by  the  McCulloch  and  Pitts  result  is 
equally  important.  It  does  not  prove  that  any  circuit  you  are  designing 
in  this  manner  really  occurs  in  nature.  It  does  not  follow  that  the  other 
functions  of  the  nerve  cell  which  have  been  dropped  from  this  descrip- 
tion are  not  essential.  It  does  not  follow  that  there  is  not  a  considerable 
problem  left  just  in  saying  what  you  think  is  to  be  described.  Let  me 
try  to  put  this  in  another  way.  If  you  consider  certain  activities  of  the 
human  nervous  system,  you  find  that  some  of  them  are  such  that  all 
parts  of  them  can  be  described,  but  one  is  flabbergasted  by  the  totality 
of  what  has  to  be  described. 

Suppose  you  want  to  describe  the  fact  that  when  you  look  at  a 
triangle  you  realize  that  it's  a  triangle,  and  you  realize  this  whether 
it's  small  or  large.  It's  relatively  simple  to  describe  geometrically 
what  is  meant:  a  triangle  is  a  group  of  three  lines  arranged  in  a  certain 
manner.  Well,  that's  fine,  except  that  you  also  recognize  as  a  triangle 
something  whose  sides  are  curved,  and  a  situation  where  only  the 
vertices  are  indicated,  and  something  where  the  interior  is  shaded  and 
the  exterior  is  not.  You  can  recognize  as  a  triangle  many  different 
things,  all  of  which  have  some  indication  of  a  triangle  in  them,  but 
the  more  details  you  try  to  put  in  a  description  of  it  the  longer  the 
description  becomes. 

In  addition,  the  ability  to  recognize  triangles  is  just  an  infinitesimal 
fraction  of  the  analogies  you  can  visually  recognize  in  geometry, 
which  in  turn  is  an  infinitesimal  fraction  of  all  the  visual  analogies  you 
can  recognize,  each  of  which  you  can  still  describe.  But  with  respect 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL  AND  INFORMATION  47 

to  the  whole  visual  machinery  of  interpreting  a  picture,  of  putting 
something  into  a  picture,  we  get  into  domains  which  you  certainly 
cannot  describe  in  those  terms.  Everybody  will  put  an  interpretation 
into  a  Rorschach  test,  but  what  interpretation  he  puts  into  it  is  a 
function  of  his  whole  personality  and  his  whole  previous  history,  and 
this  is  supposed  to  be  a  very  good  method  of  making  inferences  as  to 
what  kind  of  a  person  he  is. 

In  fine,  now,  all  of  this  may  seem  a  little  arbitrary  and  accidental, 
but  the  basic  fact  involved  is  this,  that  our  brains  are  exceedingly 
complicated.  About  one  fifth  of  the  brain  is  a  visual  brain,  which,  as 
far  as  we  know,  does  nothing  except  make  decisions  about  visual 
analogies.  So,  using  the  figures  we  have,  which  are  not  very  good,  but 
which  are  probably  all  right  for  an  orientation,  we  conclude  that  ap- 
parently a  network  of  about  2  billion  relays  does  nothing  but  deter- 
mine how  to  organize  a  visual  picture.  It  is  absolutely  not  clear  a 
priori  that  there  is  any  simpler  description  of  what  constitutes  a 
visual  analogy  than  a  description  of  the  visual  brain. 

Normally,  a  literary  description  of  what  an  automaton  is  supposed 
to  do  is  simpler  than  the  complete  diagram  of  the  automaton.  It  is 
not  true  a  priori  that  this  will  always  be  so.  There  is  a  good  deal  in 
formal  logics  to  indicate  that  the  description  of  the  functions  of  an 
automaton  is  simpler  than  the  automaton  itself,  as  long  as  the  auto- 
maton is  not  very  complicated,  but  that  when  you  get  to  high  compli- 
cations, the  actual  object  is  simpler  than  the  literary  description. 

I  am  twisting  a  logical  theorem  a  little,  but  it's  a  perfectly  good 
logical  theorem.  It's  a  theorem  of  Godel  that  the  next  logical  step,  the 
description  of  an  object,  is  one  class  type  higher  than  the  object  and 
is  therefore  asymptotically  [?]  infinitely  longer  to  describe.  I  say  that 
it's  absolutely  necessary;  it's  just  a  matter  of  complication  when  you 
get  to  this  point.  I  think  that  there  is  a  good  deal  of  reason  to  suspect 
that  this  is  so  with  things  which  have  this  disagreeably  vague  and 
fluid  impression  (like  "What  is  a  visual  analogy?"),  where  one  feels 
that  one  will  never  get  to  the  end  of  the  description.  They  may  easily 
be  in  this  condition  already,  where  doing  a  thing  is  quicker  than 
describing  it,  where  the  circuit  is  more  quickly  enumerated  than  a 
total  description  of  all  its  functions  in  all  conceivable  conditions. 

The  insight  that  a  formal  neuron  network  can  do  anything  which 
you  can  describe  in  words  is  a  very  important  insight  and  simplifies 
matters  enormously  at  low  complication  levels.  It  is  by  no  means 
certain  that  it  is  a  simplification  on  high  complication  levels.  It  is 
perfectly  possible  that  on  high  complication  levels  the  value  of  the 
theorem  is  in  the  reverse  direction,  that  it  simplifies  matters  because 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


it  guarantees  the  reverse,  namely,  that  you  can  express  logics  in 
terms  of  these  efforts  and  the  converse  may  not  be  true.  [Von  Neu- 
mann returned  to  this  point  on  p.  51,  after  his  discussion  of  Turing 
machines.] 

[  Von  Neumann  next  discussed  two  cases  in  which  circuits  of  ideal- 
ized neurons  do  not  seem  to  provide  an  explanation  of  how  the  nervous 
system  actually  performs  a  given  function.  The  first  case  concerns  the 
transmission  by  a  nerve  of  a  continuous  number  which  represents  some 
quantity  such  as  blood  pressure.  The  nerve  does  this  by  emitting 
pulses  at  a  frequency  which  is  a  monotone  function  of  the  blood  pres- 
sure. This  behavior  is  explained  in  terms  of  neural  fatigue:  after  a 
neuron  responds,  it  is  unable  to  respond  for  a  certain  period,  called 
the  refractory  period,  and  the  stronger  the  next  stimulus  the  sooner 
it  responds.  He  then  raised  the  question  "Why  has  the  digital  notation 
never  been  used  in  nature,  as  far  as  we  know,  and  why  has  this  pulse 
notation  been  used  instead  ?"  and  said  that  this  was  the  kind  of  ques- 
tion he  was  interested  in.  He  suggested  an  answer:  that  the  frequency 
modulation  scheme  is  more  reliable  than  the  digital  scheme.  See 
Section  1.1.2.3  below,  The  Computer  and  the  Brain  77-79,  and  Collected 
Works  5.306-308  and  5.375-376.] 

[  The  second  case  in  which  circuits  of  idealized  neurons  do  not  seem 
to  provide  an  explanation  of  how  the  nervous  system  actually  per- 
forms a  given  function  concerns  memory.  Von  Neumann  had  earlier 
synthesized  memory  circuits  from  idealized  neurons  and  he  remarked 
that  such  memory  circuits  could  be  arbitrarily  large.  But  he  thought 
it  probable  that  this  is  not  the  major  mechanism  used  for  memory  in 
the  nervous  system.]  This  is  not  the  way  to  make  a  memory  for  the 
simple  reason  that  to  use  a  switching  organ  like  a  neuron,  or  six  to  a 
dozen  switching  organs,  as  you  actually  would  have  to  use  because  of 
fatigue,  in  order  to  do  as  small  a  thing  as  remember  one  binary  digit, 
is  a  terrible  waste,  because  a  switching  organ  can  do  vastly  more  than 
store.  In  computing  machines  the  classical  example  of  a  machine  in 
which  the  switching  organs  were  used  to  remember  numbers  is  the 
ENIAC,  an  enormous  gadget  which  has  about  20  thousand  vacuum 
tubes  in  it.  The  ENIAC  is  about  five  times  larger  than  later  machines 
which  will  presumably  be  far  more  efficient;  it  is  an  excellent  machine 
in  many  ways,  but  it  has  one  phenomenal  shortcoming,  namely,  a 
very  small  memory.  It  has  only  a  memory  of  20  decimal  numbers  at 
points  where  it  matters;  in  spite  of  this  it  is  enormous.  The  reason  is 
that  vacuum  tubes,  in  other  words,  switching  organs,  are  used  for 
that  memory.  All  improvements  on  this  machine  postulate  that  some 
other  components  than  standard  vacuum  tubes  will  be  used  for 
memory. 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES   OF  CONTROL   AND  INFORMATION 


The  memory  requirements  of  the  human  nervous  system  are  prob- 
ably very  large.  Estimates  have  been  made  and  they  are  of  the  order 
of  1016  binary  digits.  I  will  not  attempt  to  justify  this  estimate;  a  great 
deal  can  be  said  for  any  count.  I  think  there  is  a  good  deal  of  reason  to 
believe  that  1010  switching  organs,  which  is  about  what  we  have,  is 
probably  not  the  right  order  of  magnitude  for  storing  the  kind  of 
memory  that  we  use,  and  that  it's  probably  best  to  admit  that  we 
simply  do  not  know  where  the  memory  is.  One  can  make  all  kinds  of 
statements  about  it.  One  can  surmise  thai  the  memory  consists  in  a 
change  of  the  synapses  of  the  nerve  cells,  which  is  not  decided  by 
design.  I  don't  know  whether  there  is  any  good  evidence  for  this,  but 
I  rather  think  there  is  not.  You  may  suspect  that  the  nerve  cells 
contain  a  lot  else  than  the  switching  trait,  and  that  the  memory  sits 
there.  It  may  be  so,  but  I  think  that  we  simply  know  nothing.  It  may 
well  be  that  the  memory  organs  are  of  a  completely  different  nature 
than  the  neurons. 

The  main  difficulty  with  the  memory  organ  is  that  it  appears  to  be 
nowhere  in  particular.  It  is  never  very  simple  to  locate  anything  in 
the  brain,  because  the  brain  has  an  enormous  ability  to  re-organize. 
Even  when  you  have  localized  a  function  in  a  particular  part  of  it,  if 
you  remove  that  part,  you  may  discover  that  the  brain  has  reorganized 
itself,  reassigned  its  responsibilities,  and  the  function  is  again  being 
performed.  The  flexibility  of  the  brain  is  very  great,  and  this  makes 
localization  difficult.  I  suspect  that  the  memory  function  is  less 
localized  than  anything  else.  [Cf.  The  Computer  and  the  Brain  63-68.] 

I  wanted  to  mention  these  two  things  [fatigue  and  memory]  as  very 
obvious  lacunae  in  the  McCulloch  and  Pitts  approach  to  the  nervous 
system.  I  want  to  talk  next  about  the  approach  of  Turing.  In  the 
McCulloch  and  Pitts  theory  the  conclusion  was  that  actual  automata, 
properly  described  and  axiomatized,  are  equivalent  to  formal  logics. 
In  Turing's  theory  the  conclusion  is  the  reverse.  Turing  was  interested 
in  formal  logics,  not  in  automata.  He  was  concerned  to  prove  certain 
theorems  about  an  important  problem  of  formal  logics,  the  so-called 
Entscheidungsproblem,  the,  problem  of  decision.  The  problem  is  to 
determine,  for  a  class  of  logical  expressions  or  propositions,  whether 
there  is  a  mechanical  method  for  deciding  whether  an  expression  of 
this  class  is  true  or  false.  Turing's  discussion  of  automata  was  really 
a  formal,  logical  trick  to  deal  with  this  problem  in  a  somewhat  more 
transparent  and  more  consistent  way  than  it  had  been  dealt  with 
before. 

[  Von  Neumann  then  outlined  Turing's  definition  of  an  automaton. 
Whereas  McCulloch  and  Pitts  started  with  components  or  elements, 
Turing  started  with  states.  At  any  time  the  automaton  is  in  one  of  a 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


finite  number  of  states.  "The  outside  world"  is  a  tape.  The  automaton 
senses  one  square  of  the  tape,  and  it  can  change  the  contents  of  the 
square  and  move  the  tape  one  square  to  the  left  or  right.  A  dictionary 
specifies,  for  each  state  and  each  tape  symbol,  what  the  next  state  will 
be  and  what  will  be  done  to  the  tape.  The  tape  has  a  distinguished 
square.  A  finite  program  may  be  placed  on  the  tape  initially.  The 
binary  number  computed  by  the  automaton  is  recorded  in  alternate 
squares,  starting  with  the  distinguished  square.] 

[  Von  Neumann  next  described  Turing's  result  concerning  universal 
automata.  There  is  a  universal  automaton  A  with  the  following  prop- 
erties: For  each  automaton  A  there  is  a  sequence  of  instructions  IA 
such  that  for  any  sequence  of  instructions  /,  A  supplied  with  both 
instructions  IA  and  /  computes  the  same  number  as  is  computed  by  A 
supplied  with  instructions  /.]  A  is  able  to  imitate  any  automaton, 
even  a  much  more  complicated  one.  Thus  a  lesser  degree  of  complexity 
in  an  automaton  can  be  compensated  for  by  an  appropriate  increase  ot 
complexity  of  the  instructions.  The  importance  of  Turing's  research 
is  just  this:  that  if  you  construct  an  automaton  right,  then  any  addi- 
tional requirements  about  the  automaton  can  be  handled  by  suffi- 
ciently elaborate  instructions.  This  is  only  true  if  A  is  sufficiently 
complicated,  if  it  has  reached  a  certain  minimum  level  of  complexity. 
In  other  words,  a  simpler  thing  will  never  perform  certain  operations, 
no  matter  what  instructions  you  give  it;  but  there  is  a  very  definite 
finite  point  where  an  automaton  of  this  complexity  can,  when  given 
suitable  instructions,  do  anything  that  can  be  done  by  automata  at 
all. 

[Von  Neumann  then  explained  how  the  universal  automaton  A 
simulates  an  arbitrary  automaton  A.  The  instructions  IA  contain  a 
representation  of  the  automaton  A  in  the  form  of  a  dictionary,  which 
tells,  for  each  state  of  A  and  each  tape  symbol,  the  next  state  of  A 
and  what  is  to  be  done  to  the  tape.  The  universal  automaton  A  has 
the  power  to  read  any  such  dictionary  and  act  on  it.  A  writes  on  its 
tape,  in  sequence,  the  successive  states  of  A  and  what  is  produced  on 
the  tape  of  A.]  I  will  not  go  further  in  giving  the  details  of  this.  I 
have  gone  into  it  to  the  point  to  which  I  did  in  order  to  point  out  that 
here,  for  the  first  time,  one  deals  with  something  which  has  the  at- 
tribute of  universality,  which  has  the  ability  to  do  anything  that  any- 
body can  do.  You  also  see  that  there  is  no  vicious  circle  in  it,  because 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  extra  complexity  is  brought  in  (by  giving 
more  elaborate  instructions).  You  also  see  that  the  operation  which 
ultimately  leads  to  universality  is  connected  with  a  rigorous  theory  of 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL  ANJ)   INFORMATION  51 

how  one  describes  objects  and  a  rigorous  routine  of  how  to  look  up 
statements  in  a  dictionary  and  obey  them. 

The  formal  logical  investigations  of  Turing  went  a  good  deal  further 
than  this.  Turing  proved  that  there  is  something  for  which  you  cannot 
construct  an  automaton;  namely,  you  cannot  construct  an  automaton 
which  can  predict  in  how  many  steps  another  automaton  which  can 
solve  a  certain  problem  will  actually  solve  it.  So,  you  can  construct  an 
automaton  which  can  do  anything  any  automaton  can  do,  but  you 
cannot  construct  an  automaton  which  will  predict  the  behavior  of  any 
arbitrary  automaton.  In  other  words,  you  can  build  an  organ  which 
can  do  anything  that  can  be  done,  but  you  cannot  build  an  organ 
which  tells  you  whether  it  can  be  done. 

This  is  connected  with  the  structure  of  formal  logics  and  is  specifi- 
cally connected  with  a  feature  which  I  will  not  attempt  to  discuss, 
but  which  I  would  like  to  mention  in  the  proper  jargon  for  those  of 
you  who  are  familiar  with  modern  formal  logics.  It  is  connected  with 
the  theory  of  types  and  with  the  results  of  Godel.  The  feature  is  just 
this,  that  you  can  perform  within  the  logical  type  that's  involved 
everything  that's  feasible,  but  the  question  of  whether  something  is 
feasible  in  a  type  belongs  to  a  higher  logical  type.  It's  connected  with 
the  remark  I  made  earlier  (pp.  47-48) :  that  it  is  characteristic  of  objects 
of  low  complexity  that  it  is  easier  to  talk  about  the  object  than  produce 
it  and  easier  to  predict  its  properties  than  to  build  it.  But  in  the  com- 
plicated parts  of  formal  logic  it  is  always  one  order  of  magnitude 
harder  to  tell  what  an  object  can  do  than  to  produce  the  object.  The 
domain  of  the  validity  of  the  question  is  of  a  higher  type  than  the 
question  itself. 

[  This  is  the  end  of  von  Neumann's  Second  Lecture.  I  will  add  a 
commentary  on  his  last  two  paragraphs,  beginning  with  some  general 
remarks  on  Turing  machines. 

A  Turing  machine  is  basically  a  finite  automaton  with  an  indefi- 
nitely extendible  tape.  But  there  are  many  different  ways  of  using  a 
Turing  machine.  Let  the  squares  of  the  tape  be  numbered  0,  1,  2, 
3,  •  •  •  ,  with  even  numbered  squares  reserved  for  working  space  and 
odd  numbered  squares  reserved  for  the  program  or  problem  statement 
(if  there  is  one)  and  for  the  answer.  Let  the  answer  symbols  be  zero 
and  one,  in  addition  to  the  blank;  these  could,  of  course,  be  coded 
sequences  of  two  basic  symbols,  a  blank  and  a  mark.  Assume  finally 
that  the  machine  writes  the  answer  digits  (zero  and  one)  in  successive 
answer  squares. 

A  "concrete  Turing  machine"  is  a  Turing  machine  which  has  a 


UNIVERSITY  OP 

ItUNOiS  LIBRARY 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


finite  "program"  or  problem  statement  on  its  tape  initially.  An 
"abstract  Turing  machine' '  is  the  class  of  all  concrete  Turing  machines 
which  contain  a  given  finite  automaton.  We  can  think  of  an  abstract 
Turing  machine  as  a  finite  automaton  with  an  indefinitely  extendible 
blank  tape  on  which  any  program  or  problem  may  be  placed  initially. 

Concrete  Turing  machines  may  be  divided  into  two  classes:  the 
circular  and  the  circle-free.  A  "circular"  machine  prints  a  finite  se- 
quence of  binary  digits  and  "halts."  A  "circle-free"  machine  continues 
to  print  binary  digits  in  alternate  squares  forever;  we  will  speak  of  it 
as  computing  an  infinite  sequence. 

Von  Neumann  discussed  above  a  universal  Turing  machine  which 
consists  of  a  finite  automaton  A  and  an  indefinitely  extendible  tape. 
A  universal  Turing  machine  is  an  abstract  Turing  machine  which 
computes  every  sequence  computed  by  Turing  machines.  More 
precisely,  for  each  concrete  Turing  machine  with  finite  automaton  A 
and  program  /,  there  is  a  program  IA  such  that  machine  A  with  pro- 
grams I A  and  /  computes  the  sequence  computed  by  machine  A  with 
program  /.  A  universal  Turing  machine  can  be  characterized  in 
another  way.  Let  r  be  the  class  of  finite  and  infinite  sequences  com- 
puted by  concrete  Turing  machines.  Then,  every  sequence  of  T  is 
computed  by  the  abstract  Turing  machine  A  +  IA  +  /,  where  IA  and 
/  vary  over  all  programs.  Since  the  concatenation  of  two  programs  is 
a  program,  every  sequence  of  r  is  computed  by  the  abstract  Turing 
machine  A  +  /,  where  /  varies  over  all  programs. 

A  "decision  machine"  for  a  given  class  of  questions  is  an  abstract 
Turing  machine  which,  when  given  a  question  of  that  class,  prints 
a  one  if  the  answer  to  the  question  is  "yes"  and  a  zero  if  the  answer 
to  the  question  is  "no." 

The  "halting  problem"  is  the  problem  of  deciding  whether  an 
arbitrary  concrete  Turing  machine  is  circular  (will  halt  sometime)  or 
circle-free.  Turing  showed  that  the  halting  problem  is  undecidable, 
that  is,  that  there  is  no  decision  machine  for  halting.3  The  proof  is 
given  below  in  Sec.  1.6.3.2  of  Part  II.  Turing  proved  as  a  corollary  to 
this  that  there  is  no  decision  machine  for  deciding  whether  an  arbi- 
trary concrete  Turing  machine  will  ever  print  a  given  symbol  (for 
example,  a  zero).  Since  both  halting  and  printing  a  given  symbol  are 
aspects  of  the  behavior  of  a  Turing  machine,  it  follows  from  Turing's 
results  that  automata  behavior  is  not  completely  predictable  by 
automata.  As  von  Neumann  put  it  above,  "you  cannot  construct  an 

3  [  Turing,  "On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an  Application  to  the  Entschei- 
dungsproblem,"  Sec.  8.] 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL  AND  INFORMATION  53 

automaton  which  will  predict  the  behavior  of  any  arbitrary  autom- 
aton." 

Concrete  Turing  machines  can  be  enumerated  and  thereby  placed 
in  one  to  one  correspondence  with  the  non-negative  integers.  Consider 
all  these  machines  and  let  the  variable  "t"  range  over  the  integers 
representing  them.  We  define  the  number  theoretic  function  n(t)  as 
the  number  of  steps  which  machine  t  takes  to  print  its  first  zero.  If 
machine  t  never  prints  a  zero,  then  n(t)  is  defined  to  be  zero. 

Note  that  a  sequence  of  n  ones  followed  by  a  zero  can  be  inter- 
preted as  the  integer  n.  This  leads  to  the  question:  Is  there  an  abstract 
Turing  machine  which  can  compute  n(t)  for  any  t?  It  follows  immedi- 
ately from  Turing's  corollary  that  there  is  not,  for  if  we  could  com- 
pute n(t)  we  could  decide  whether  or  not  machine  t  ever  prints  a  zero. 
I  think  that  this  is  what  von  Neumann  had  in  mind  when  he  said 
"Turing  proved  that  you  cannot  construct  an  automaton  which  can 
predict  in  how  many  steps  another  automaton  which  can  solve  a 
certain  problem  will  actually  solve  it." 

In  the  last  paragraph  of  his  Second  Lecture  von  Neumann  referred 
to  a  theorem  of  Godel  "that  you  can  perform  within  the  logical  type 
that's  involved  everything  that's  feasible,  but  the  question  of  whether 
something  is  feasible  in  a  type  belongs  to  a  higher  logical  type." 
Since  I  knew  of  no  such  theorem  by  Godel  I  found  this  reference 
puzzling,  as  well  as  the  earlier  reference  to  Godel  (p.  47)  and  a  related 
reference  in  von  Neumann's  Hixon  Symposium  paper,  "The  General 
and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata"  (Collected  Works  5.310-311).  I 
wrote  Professor  Kurt  Godel  to  see  whether  he  could  throw  any  light 
on  it.  His  answer  gives,  I  think,  the  most  plausible  explanation  of  the 
reference,  and  so  I  include  the  relevant  parts  of  our  correspondence, 
with  minor  editing. 

I  wrote  to  Professor  Godel  as  follows:  "I  am  engaged  in  editing  two 
of  John  von  Neumann's  uncompleted  manuscripts  on  the  theory  of 
automata.  In  one  of  these,  a  series  of  lectures  he  delivered  at  the 
University  of  Illinois  in  1949,  he  makes  a  reference  to  your  work  which 
I  have  been  unable  to  figure  out.  Since  there  is  the  possibility  he  may 
have  discussed  this  point  with  you,  I  am  taking  the  liberty  of  writing 
you  about  it. 

"The  story  begins  with  Johnny's  Hixon  Symposium  talk  at  Pasa- 
dena in  1948.  He  discusses  there  the  problem  of  giving  a  rigorous 
description  of  a  visual  analogy.  In  recognizing  visual  patterns,  the 
human  eye  and  nervous  system  function  as  a  finite  automaton  with 
a  certain  behavior.  Von  Neumann  seems  to  suggest  that  possibly  the 
simplest  way  to  describe  the  behavior  of  this  finite  automaton  is  to 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


describe  the  structure  of  the  automaton  itself.  This  is  certainly  plausi- 
ble. But  he  then  expresses  the  point  in  a  way  I  do  not  understand: 
'It  is  not  at  all  certain  that  in  this  domain  a  real  object  might  not 
constitute  the  simplest  description  of  itself.  That  is,  any  attempt  to 
describe  it  by  the  usual  literary  or  formal-logical  method  may  lead  to 
something  less  manageable  and  more  involved.  In  fact,  some  results  in 
modern  logic  would  tend  to  indicate  that  phenomena  like  this  have  to 
be  expected  when  we  come  to  really  complicated  entities/  The  under- 
lined passage  seems  to  refer  to  your  work.  I  enclose  a  copy  of  the  full 
context. 

"In  his  Illinois  lectures,  given  in  1949,  Johnny  seems  to  be  making 
the  same  point,  namely,  that  the  simplest  way  to  describe  accurately 
what  constitutes  a  visual  analogy  is  to  specify  the  connections  of  the 
visual  part  of  the  brain.  He  then  proceeds  to  say  that  there  is  a  good 
deal  in  formal  logic  which  indicates  that  when  an  automaton  is  not 
very  complicated  the  description  of  the  functions  of  that  automaton 
is  simpler  than  a  description  of  the  automaton  itself  but  that  the 
situation  is  reversed  with  respect  to  complicated  automata.  His 
reference  to  you  then  appears  explicitly.  He  says,  T  am  a  little  twisting 
a  logical  theorem,  but  it's  a  perfectly  good  logical  theorem.  It's  a 
theorem  of  Godel  that  the  next  logical  step,  the  description  of  an 
object,  is  one  class  type  higher  than  the  object  and  is  therefore  asymp- 
totically [?]  infinitely  longer  to  describe.' 

"He  returns  to  this  point  later  after  discussing  Turing  machines 
and  mentioning  Turing's  result  about  the  undecidability  of  the  halting 
problem.  He  then  says  that  all  of  this  is  connected  with  the  theory  of 
types  and  with  your  results.  The  recording  transcript  is  mangled  at 
this  point  and  I  will  reconstruct  it  as  best  I  can.  Tt  is  connected  with 
the  theory  of  types  and  with  the  results  of  Godel.  The  feature  is  just 
this,  that  you  can  perform  within  the  logical  type  that's  involved 
everything  that's  feasible  but  the  question  of  whether  something  is 
feasible  in  a  type  belongs  to  a  higher  logical  type.  It's  connected  with 
the  remark  I  made  earlier:  that  it  is  characteristic  of  objects  of  low 
complexity  that  it  is  easier  to  talk  about  the  object  than  produce  it 
and  easier  to  predict  its  properties  than  to  build  it.  But  in  the  com- 
plicated parts  of  formal  logic  it  is  always  one  order  of  magnitude 
harder  to  tell  what  an  object  can  do  than  to  produce  the  object.  The 
domain  of  the  validity  of  the  question  is  of  a  higher  type  than  the 
question  itself.'  I  enclose  copies  of  the  relevant  pages  of  the  Illinois 
lectures. 

"It  is  easy  to  regard  the  description  of  an  object  as  of  one  type  level 
higher  than  the  object  itself,  but  beyond  this  I  do  not  see  what  von 


RIGOROUS  THEORIES  OF  CONTROL  AND  INFORMATION  55 

Neumann  has  in  mind.  Two  possibilities  occured  to  me  but  both  give 
a  result  opposite  to  that  which  Johnny  needs.  One  may  regard  a  Godel 
number  as  a  description  of  a  formula.  However,  in  some  cases  at  least, 
the  Godel  number  of  a  formula  may  be  described  in  fewer  symbols 
than  the  formula,  else  the  self-referring  undecidable  formula  could 
not  exist.4  The  other  possibility  concerns  a  theorem  in  your  1936 
paper,  "tlber  die  Lange  der  Beweise.,,  Given  a  system  S  and  a  larger 
system  Si .  The  theorem  says  that  for  every  recursive  function  F, 
there  exists  a  sentence  which  is  provable  in  both  systems  and  such 
that  the  shortest  proofs  in  these  two  systems  satisfy  the  inequality 
that  the  Godel  number  of  the  proof  in  the  smaller  system  is  larger  than 
the  recursive  function  F  applied  to  the  Godel  number  of  the  proof  in 
the  larger  system.  This  fits  everything  that  von  Neumann  says  except 
that  the  result  seems  to  go  in  the  opposite  direction:  namely,  the 
higher  the  type  the  shorter  the  proof. 

"I  would  appreciate  very  much  any  light  that  you  could  throw  on 
these  puzzling  passages  of  von  Neumann." 

Professor  Godel  replied  as  follows.  "I  have  some  conjecture  as  to 
what  von  Neumann  may  have  had  in  mind  in  the  passages  you  quote, 
but  since  I  never  discussed  these  matters  with  him  it  is  only  a  guess. 

"I  think  the  theorem  of  mine  which  von  Neumann  refers  to  is  not 
that  on  the  existence  of  undecidable  propositions  or  that  on  the  lengths 
of  proofs  but  rather  the  fact  that  a  complete  epistemological  descrip- 
tion of  a  language  A  cannot  be  given  in  the  same  language  A ,  because 
the  concept  of  truth  of  sentences  of  A  cannot  be  defined  in  A .  It  is  this 
theorem  which  is  the  true  reason  for  the  existence  of  undecidable  prop- 
ositions in  the  formal  systems  containing  arithmetic.  I  did  not,  how- 
ever, formulate  it  explicitly  in  my  paper  of  1931  but  only  in  my  Prince- 
ton lectures  of  1934. 5  The  same  theorem  was  proved  by  Tarski  in  his 
paper  on  the  concept  of  truth  published  in  1933  in  Act.  Soc.  Sci.  Lit. 
Vars.,  translated  on  pp.  152-278  of  Logic,  Semantics,  and  Metamaihe- 
matics* 

"Now  this  theorem  certainly  shows  that  the  description  of  what  a 
mechanism  is  doing  in  certain  cases  is  more  involved  than  the  descrip- 

4  [  See  Godel's  "Uber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia  Mathema- 
tica  und  verwandter  Systeme  I."  The  undecidable  formula  has  the  Godel 
number  n  and  says  'The  formula  whose  Godel  number  is  n  is  not  a  theorem.' ' 
Thus,  via  Godel's  coding,  the  undecidable  formula  refers  to  itself.  It  is  un- 
decidable in  the  sense  that  neither  it  nor  its  negation  is  a  theorem  of  the  system 
Godel  is  studying.] 

5  [  Godel,  "On  Undecidable  Propositions  of  Formal  Mathematical  Sys- 
tems. "] 

6  [  The  exact  reference  to  Tarski 's  paper  was  added  later.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


tion  of  the  mechanism,  in  the  sense  that  it  requires  new  and  more 
abstract  primitive  terms,  namely  higher  types.  However,  this  implies 
nothing  as  to  the  number  of  symbols  necessary,  where  the  relationship 
may  very  well  be  in  the  opposite  direction,  as  you  rightly  remark. 

"However,  what  von  Neumann  perhaps  had  in  mind  appears  more 
clearly  from  the  universal  Turing  machine.  There  it  might  be  said 
that  the  complete  description  of  its  behavior  is  infinite  because,  in 
view  of  the  non-existence  of  a  decision  procedure  predicting  its  be- 
havior, the  complete  description  could  be  given  only  by  an  enumera- 
tion of  all  instances.  Of  course  this  presupposes  that  only  decidable 
descriptions  are  considered  to  be  complete  descriptions,  but  this  is  in 
line  with  the  finitistic  way  of  thinking.  The  universal  Turing  machine, 
where  the  ratio  of  the  two  complexities  is  infinity,  might  then  be  con- 
sidered to  be  a  limiting  case  of  other  finite  mechanisms.  This  immedi- 
ately leads  to  von  Neumann's  conjecture.,,] 


Third  Lecture 


STATISTICAL  THEORIES  OF 
INFORMATION 


Theory  of  information:  Probabilistic  part.  Relationship  of  strict  and  of 
probabilistic  logics.  Keynes'  interpretation  of  probability  theory.  Exemplifi- 
cation of  the  relationship  of  logics  to  strict  classical  mechanics  on  the  one 
hand,  and  to  statistical  mechanics  on  the  other.  Corresponding  situation  in 
quantum  mechanics. 

The  mathematical  aspects  of  the  transition  from  strict  to  probabilistic 
logics.  Analysis  and  combinatorics. 

The  thermodynamical  aspect:  Information  and  entropy. 

The  theory  of  Szilard. 

The  theory  of  Shannon. 

Additional  remarks  on  the  thermodynamical  nature  of  the  internal  balance 
of  a  computing  machine. 

I  conclude  my  remarks  about  strict  and  rigorous  questions  of  infor- 
mation at  this  point  and  pass  on  to  statistical  considerations  involving 
information.  That  this  is  the  important  thing  in  dealing  with  automata 
and  their  functions  is  fairly  evident,  for  two  reasons  at  least.  The  first 
of  these  reasons  may  seem  somewhat  extraneous  and  accidental,  al- 
though I  think  it  is  not,  but  the  second  reason  is  certainly  not. 

The  first  reason  is  that  in  no  practical  way  can  we  imagine  an  autom- 
aton which  is  really  reliable.  If  you  axiomatize  an  automaton  by 
telling  exactly  what  it  will  do  in  every  completely  denned  situation 
you  are  missing  an  important  part  of  the  problem.  The  axiomatization 
of  automata  for  the  completely  denned  situation  is  a  very  nice  exercise 
for  one  who  faces  the  problem  for  the  first  time,  but  everybody  who 
has  had  experience  with  it  knows  that  it's  only  a  very  preliminary 
stage  of  the  problem. 

The  second  reason  for  the  importance  of  statistical  considerations 
in  the  theory  of  automata  is  this.  If  you  look  at  automata  which  have 
been  built  by  men  or  which  exist  in  nature  you  will  very  frequently 
notice  that  their  structure  is  controlled  only  partly  by  rigorous  re- 
quirements and  is  controlled  to  a  much  larger  extent  by  the  manner 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


in  which  they  might  fail  and  by  the  (more  or  less  effective)  precau- 
tionary measures  which  have  been  taken  against  their  failure.  And  to 
say  that  they  are  precautions  against  failure  is  to  overstate  the  case, 
to  use  an  optimistic  terminology  which  is  completely  alien  to  the  sub- 
ject. Rather  than  precautions  against  failure,  they  are  arrangements 
by  which  it  is  attempted  to  achieve  a  state  where  at  least  a  majority 
of  all  failures  will  not  be  lethal.  There  can  be  no  question  of  eliminat- 
ing failures  or  of  completely  paralyzing  the  effects  of  failures.  All  we 
can  try  to  do  is  to  arrange  an  automaton  so  that  in  the  vast  majority 
of  failures  it  can  continue  to  operate.  These  arrangements  give  pallia- 
tives of  failures,  not  cures.  Most  of  the  arrangements  of  artificial  and 
natural  automata  and  the  principles  involved  therein  are  of  this  sort. 

To  permit  failure  as  an  independent  logical  entity  means  that  one 
does  not  state  the  axioms  in  a  rigorous  manner.  The  axioms  are  not 
of  the  form:  if  A  and  B  happen,  C  will  follow.  The  axioms  are  always  of 
this  variety:  if  A  and  B  happen,  C  will  follow  with  a  certain  specified 
probability,  D  will  follow  with  another  specified  probability,  and  so 
on.  In  other  words,  in  every  situation  several  alternatives  are  per- 
mitted with  various  probabilities.  Mathematically  it  is  simplest  to- 
say  that  anything  can  follow  upon  anything  in  accordance  with  a 
probability  matrix.  You  may  put  your  question  in  this  manner:  If  A 
and  B  have  happened,  what  is  the  probability  that  C  will  follow?  This 
probability  pattern  gives  you  a  probabilistic  system  of  logics.  Both 
artificial  and  natural  automata  should  be  discussed  in  this  system  as 
soon  as  there  is  any  degree  of  involvement.1  I  will  come  later  to  the 
question  as  to  why  it  is  just  complexity  which  pushes  one  into  this 
kind  of  axiomatization  instead  of  a  strict  one.2 

Now  this  inclines  one  to  view  probability  as  a  branch  of  logics,  or 
rather,  to  view  logics  affected  with  probability  as  an  extension  of 
ordinary  rigorous  logics.  The  view  that  probability  is  an  extension  of 
logics  is  not  trivial,  is  not  generally  accepted,  and  is  not  the  major 
interpretation  of  probability.  It  is,  however,  the  classical  interpreta- 
tion. The  competing  interpretation  is  the  frequency  interpretation, 
the  attitude  that  logic  is  completely  rigorous,  and  with  respect  to 
phenomena  about  which  you  are  not  completely  informed,  you  can 
only  make  statements  of  frequencies. 

This  distinction  was,  I  think,  quite  clear  to  Laplace,  who  pointed 

1  [  See  von  Neumann's  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable 
Organs  from  Unreliable  Components"  for  a  detailed  treatment  of  automata 
from  this  point  of  view.] 

2  [  For  a  given  probability  of  malfunction  of  a  component,  the  more  complex 
the  automaton  the  more  likely  it  is  that  a  lethal  failure  will  occur.] 


STATISTICAL  THEORIES  OF  INFORMATION 




out  that  there  are  two  possible  attitudes  toward  probability:  the  fre- 
quency and  the  logical.3  In  more  recent  times  the  distinction  was  em- 
phasized strongly  and  made  the  basis  of  a  system  by  the  economist 
Keynes,  who  wrote  his  thesis  on  probability.4  He  analyzed  this  ques- 
tion in  considerable  detail  and  showed  that,  aside  from  the  more  con- 
ventional frequency  viewpoint  about  probability,  the  logical  one  also 
exists.  But  he  made  no  attempt  to  separate  strict  logics  and  probabil- 
ity and  simply  said  that,  if  you  view  a  sequence  of  events  A  and  B, 
they  have  the  quantitative  characteristic,  "the  probability  with  which 
B  follows  A"  The  only  tie  to  strict  logics  is  that  when  the  probability 
is  one  you  have  an  implication,  and  when  the  probability  is  zero  you 
have  an  exclusion,  and  when  the  probability  is  close  to  one  or  close  to 
zero  you  can  still  make  those  inferences  in  a  less  rigorous  domain. 

There  are  undeniable  weaknesses  of  the  logical  position.  In  some 
ways  of  looking  at  probability  it  is  opportune  not  to  identify  zero 
probability  with  absurdity.  Also,  it  is  not  quite  clear  in  what  sense  a 
low  probability  means  that  one  might  expect  that  the  thing  will  not 
happen.  However,  Keynes  produced  a  self -consistent  axiomatic  sys- 
tem. There's  a  great  deal  in  other  modern  theories,  for  instance,  in 
quantum  mechanics,  which  inclines  one  very  strongly  to  take  this 
philosophical  position,  although  the  last  word  about  this  subject  has 
certainly  not  been  said  and  is  not  going  to  be  said  for  a  long  time. 
Anyway,  one  is  also  tempted  in  the  case  of  quantum  mechanics  to 
modify  one's  outlook  on  logics  and  to  view  probability  as  intrinsically 
tied  to  logics.5 

[  Von  Neumann  discussed  next  two  theories  of  probability  and  in- 
formation "which  are  quite  relevant  in  this  context  although  they  are 
not  conceived  from  the  strictly  logical  point  of  view."  The  first  is  the 
theory  of  entropy  and  information  in  thermodynamics;  the  second 
is  Shannon's  information  theory. 

In  connection  with  entropy  and  information  von  Neumann  referred 
to  Boltzmann,  Hartley,  and  Szilard.  He  explained  at  length  the  para- 

3  [  A  Philosophical  Essay  on  Probabilities.] 

4  [  A  Treatise  on  Probability.] 

5  [  In  his  "Quantum  Logics  (Strict-and-Probability-Logics)",  von  Neumann 
concluded:  ^Probability  logics  cannot  be  reduced  to  strict  logics,  but  constitute  an 
essentially  wider  system  than  the  latter,  and  statements  of  the  form  P(a,  b)  =  <j> 
(0  <  <f>  <  1)  are  perfectly  new  and  sui  generis  aspects  of  physical  reality. 

"So  probability  logics  appear  as  an  essential  extension  of  strict  logics.  This 
view,  the  so-called  'logical  theory  of  probability'  is  the  foundation  of  J.  M. 
Keynes's  work  on  this  subject." 

Compare  von  Neumann  and  Birkhoff,  "The  Logic  of  Quantum  Mechanics," 
and  von  Neumann  and  Morgenstern,  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behavior, 
Sec.  3.3.3.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


dox  of  Maxwell's  demon  and  how  Szilard  resolved  it  by  working  out 
the  relation  of  entropy  to  information.6  Von  Neumann  said  that 
Shannon's  theory  is  a  quantitative  theory  of  measuring  the  capacity 
of  a  communications  channel.  He  explained  and  illustrated  the  con- 
cept of  redundancy.  He  pointed  out  that  redundancy  makes  it  possible 
to  correct  errors,  for  example,  to  read  proof.  Redundancy  "is  the  only 
thing  which  makes  it  possible  to  write  a  text  which  is  longer  than,  say, 
ten  pages.  In  other  words,  a  language  which  has  maximum  compres- 
sion would  actually  be  completely  unsuited  to  conveying  information 
beyond  a  certain  degree  of  complexity,  because  you  could  never  find 
out  whether  a  text  is  right  or  wrong.  And  this  is  a  question  of  principle. 
It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  complexity  of  the  medium  in  which  you 
work  has  something  to  do  with  redundancy." 

In  his  review  of  Wiener's  Cybernetics  von  Neumann  made  an  ex- 
tended statement  about  entropy  and  information  which  it  is  appro- 
priate to  quote  here.  "Entropy  for  the  physicist  is  a  concept  belonging 
to  the  discipline  of  thermodynamics  where  the  transformations  among 
the  various  forms  of  energy  are  studied.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
total  energy  of  a  complete,  closed  system  is  always  conserved :  energy 
is  neither  created  nor  lost  but  only  transformed.  This  constitutes  the 
first  fundamental  theorem  of  thermodynamics,  or  the  energy  theorem. 
There  is,  however,  in  addition,  the  second  fundamental  theorem  of 
thermodynamics,  or  entropy  theorem,  which  states  that  a  hierarchy 
exists  among  the  forms  of  energy:  mechanical  (kinetic  or  potential) 
energy,  constituting  the  highest  form,  thermal  energies  constituting 
under  it  a  decreasing  hierarchical  sequence  in  the  order  of  decreasing 
temperature,  and  all  other  forms  of  energy  permitting  a  complete 
classification  relative  to  the  gradations  of  this  schema.  It  states,  fur- 
thermore, that  energy  is  always  degraded,  that  is,  that  it  always  moves 
spontaneously  from  a  higher  form  to  a  lower  one,  or  if  the  opposite 
should  happen  in  a  part  of  the  system,  a  compensatory  degradation 
will  have  to  take  place  in  some  other  part.  The  bookkeeping  that  is 
required  to  account  for  this  continuing  overall  degradation  is  effected 
by  a  certain  well  defined  physical  quantity,  the  entropy,  which  meas- 
ures the  hierarchic  position  held  or  the  degree  of  degradation  suffered 
by  any  form  of  energy. 

"The  thermodynamical  methods  of  measuring  entropy  were  known 
in  the  mid-nineteenth  century.  Already  in  the  early  work  on  statistical 
physics  (L.  Boltzmann,  1896)  it  was  observed  that  entropy  was  closely 

6  [  There  is  a  good  exposition  of  the  work  of  Szilard,  as  well  as  that  of  Shan- 
non and  Hamming,  in  Brillouin's  Science  and  Information  Theory.] 


STATISTICAL  THEORIES  OF  INFORMATION 




connected  with  information:  Boltzmann  found  entropy  to  be  propor- 
tional to  the  logarithm  of  the  number  of  alternatives  which  are  possi- 
ble for  a  physical  system  after  all  the  information  that  one  possesses 
about  that  system  macroscopically  (that  is,  on  the  directly,  humanly 
observable  scale)  has  been  recorded.7  In  other  words,  it  is  proportional 
to  the  logarithm  of  the  amount  of  missing  information.  This  concept 
was  elaborated  further  by  various  authors  for  various  applications: 
H.  Nyquist  and  R.  V.  L.  Hartley,  for  transmission  of  information  in 
the  technical  communication  media  (Bell  System  Technical  Journal, 
Vol.  3,  1924,  and  Vol.  7,  1928) ;  L.  Szilard,  for  information  in  physics 
in  general  (Zschr.  f.  Phys.,  Vol.  53,  1929) ;  and  the  reviewer,  for  quan- 
tum mechanics  and  elementary  particle  physics  (Mathematical 
Foundations  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  Berlin,  1932,  Chapter  V). 

"The  technically  well-equipped  reader  is  advised  to  consult  at  this 
point  some  additional  literature,  primarily  L.  Szilard's  work,  referred 
to  above,  which  also  contains  a  particularly  instructive  analysis  of 
the  famous  thermodynamical  paradox  of  "Maxwell's  demon, "  and 
C.  E.  Shannon's  very  important  and  interesting  recent  work  on  the 
"Theory  of  Information, "  "Artificial  Languages,"  "Codes,"  etc. 
(Bell  System  Technical  Journal,  Vol.  27,  1948).  There  is  reason  to 
believe  that  the  general  degeneration  laws,  which  hold  when  entropy 
is  used  as  a  measure  of  the  hierarchic  position  of  energy,  have  valid 
analogs  when  entropy  is  used  as  a  measure  of  information.  On  this 
basis  one  may  suspect  the  existence  of  connections  between  thermody- 
namics and  new  extensions  of  logics." 

In  the  Illinois  lectures  von  Neumann  next  discussed  Hamming's 
work  on  error-detecting  and  error-correcting  codes.  He  then  showed 
how  the  digital  system  with  a  base  (binary,  decimal,  etc.)  is  an  applica- 
tion of  information  theory.  "Digitalization  is  just  a  very  clever  trick 
to  produce  extreme  precision  out  of  poor  precision.  By  writing  down 
30  binary  digits  with  30  instruments,  each  of  which  is  only  good 
enough  that  you  can  distinguish  two  states  of  it  (with  intrinsic  errors 
maybe  on  the  10  per  cent  level),  you  can  represent  a  number  to  ap- 
proximately one  part  in  a  billion.  The  main  virtue  of  the  digital  sys- 
tem is  that  we  know  no  other  trick  which  can  achieve  this.  From  the 
information  point  of  view  it  is  clear  that  this  can  be  done,  because 
the  entropy  in  30  binary  instruments  is  30  units,  and  something  which 

7  [  Vorlesungen  iiber  Gastheorie,  Vol.  I,  Sec.  6.  Boltzmann's  result  appeared 
originally  in  1877  in  "Uber  die  Beziehung  zwischen  dem  zweiten  Hauptsatze 
der  mechanischen  Warmetheorie  und  der  Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung  respek- 
tive  den  Satzen  iiber  das  Warrnleichgewicht,"  Wissenschaftliche  Abhandlungen , 
Vol.  II,  pp.  164-223.] 


G2 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


is  known  to  one  part  in  a  billion  has  an  entropy  of  the  logarithm  of  a 
billion  (to  the  base  two),  or  about  30  units." 

He  then  pointed  out  that  while  organisms  use  mixed  analog-pulse 
systems  for  transmitting  information,  they  never  (to  the  best  of  our 
knowledge)  use  a  coded  digital  system  with  a  base.  Rather,  when 
"the  nervous  system  transmits  a  number,  it  transmits  it  by  what  is 
essentially  a  frequency  modulation  trick  and  not  as  a  coded  digital 
aggregate. "  He  suggested  that  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the  frequency 
modulation  method  is  more  reliable  than  the  digital  system.] 

I  have  been  trying  to  justify  the  suspicion  that  a  theory  of  informa- 
tion is  needed  and  that  very  little  of  what  is  needed  exists  yet.  Such 
small  traces  of  it  which  do  exist,  and  such  information  as  one  has 
about  adjacent  fields  indicate  that,  if  found,  it  is  likely  to  be  similar 
to  two  of  our  existing  theories:  formal  logics  and  thermodynamics. 
It  is  not  surprising  that  this  new  theory  of  information  should  be  like 
formal  logics,  but  it  is  surprising  that  it  is  likely  to  have  a  lot  in  com- 
mon with  thermodynamics. 

Though  this  new  theory  of  information  will  be  similar  to  formal 
logics  in  many  respects,  it  will  probably  be  closer  to  ordinary  mathe- 
matics than  formal  logics  is.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  present  day 
formal  logics  has  a  very  un-analytical,  un-mathematical  charac- 
teristic: it  deals  with  absolutely  all-or-none  processes,  where  every- 
thing that  either  does  or  does  not  happen  is  finitely  feasible  or  not 
finitely  feasible.  These  all-or-none  processes  are  only  weakly  connected 
to  analysis,  which  is  the  best  developed  and  best  known  part  of  mathe- 
matics, while  they  are  closely  eonnected  to  combinatorics,  that  part 
of  mathematics  of  which  we  know  the  least.  There  is  reason  to  believe 
that  the  kind  of  formal  logical  machinery  we  will  have  to  use  here 
will  be  closer  to  ordinary  mathematics  than  present  day  logics  is. 
Specifically,  it  will  be  closer  to  analysis,  because  all  axioms  are  likely 
to  be  of  a  probabilistic  and  not  of  a  rigorous  character.  Such  a  phe- 
nomenon has  taken  place  in  the  foundations  of  quantum  mechanics. 

Thermodynamical  concepts  will  probably  enter  into  this  new  theory 
of  information.  There  are  strong  indications  that  information  is  similar 
to  entropy  and  that  degenerative  processes  of  entropy  are  paralleled 
by  degenerative  processes  in  the  processing  of  information.  It  is  likely 
that  you  cannot  define  the  function  of  an  automaton,  or  its  efficiency, 
without  characterizing  the  milieu  in  which  it  works  by  means  of  sta- 
tistical traits  like  the  ones  used  to  characterize  a  milieu  in  thermo- 
dynamics. The  statistical  variables  of  the  automaton's  milieu  will, 
of  course,  be  somewhat  more  involved  than  the  standard  thermody- 
namical variable  of  temperature,  but  they  will  probably  be  similar 
in  character. 


STATISTICAL  THEORIES  OP  INFORMATION 




Also,  it  is  quite  clear  from  the  practice  of  building  computing  ma- 
chines that  the  decisive  properties  of  computing  machines  involve 
balance:  balances  between  the  speeds  of  various  parts,  balances  be- 
tween the  speed  of  one  part  and  the  sizes  of  other  parts,  even  balances 
between  the  speed  ratio  of  two  parts  and  the  sizes  of  other  parts.  I 
mentioned  this  in  the  case  of  the  hierarchic  structure  of  memory 
[p.  41].  All  of  these  requirements  look  like  the  balance  requirements 
one  makes  in  thermodynamics  for  the  sake  of  efficiency.  An  automaton 
in  which  one  part  is  too  fast  for  another  part,  or  where  the  memory  is 
too  small,  or  where  the  speed  ratio  of  two  memory  stages  is  too  large 
for  the  size  of  one,  looks  very  much  like  a  heat  engine  which  doesn't 
run  properly  because  excessively  high  temperature  differences  exist 
between  its  parts.  I  will  not  go  into  the  details  of  this,  but  I  would 
like  to  emphasize  that  this  thermodynamical  link  is  probably  quite 
a  close  one. 


Fourth  Lecture 


THE  ROLE  OF  HIGH  AND  OF 
EXTREMELY  HIGH 
COMPLICATION 


Comparisons  between  computing  machines  and  the  nervous  systems. 
Estimates  of  size  for  computing  machines,  present  and  near  future. 

Estimates  for  size  for  the  human  central  nervous  system.  Excursus  about 
the  "mixed"  character  of  living  organisms.  Analog  and  digital  elements. 
Observations  about  the  "mixed"  character  of  all  componentry,  artificial  as 
well  as  natural.  Interpretation  of  the  position  to  be  taken  with  respect  to 
these. 

Evaluation  of  the  discrepancy  in  size  between  artificial  and  natural  auto- 
mata. Interpretation  of  this  discrepancy  in  terms  of  physical  factors.  Nature 
of  the  materials  used. 

The  probability  of  the  presence  of  other  intellectual  factors.  The  role  of 
complication  and  the  theoretical  penetration  that  it  requires. 

Questions  of  reliability  and  errors  reconsidered.  Probability  of  individual 
errors  and  length  of  procedure.  Typical  lengths  of  procedure  for  computing 
machines  and  for  living  organisms — that  is,  for  artificial  and  for  natural 
automata.  Upper  limits  on  acceptable  probability  of  error  in  individual 
operations.  Compensation  by  checking  and  self -correcting  features. 

Differences  of  principle  in  the  way  in  which  errors  are  dealt  with  in  artificial 
and  in  natural  automata.  The  "single  error"  principle  in  artificial  automata. 
Crudeness  of  our  approach  in  this  case,  due  to  the  lack  of  adequate  theory. 
More  sophisticated  treatment  of  this  problem  in  natural  automata :  The  role 
of  the  autonomy  of  parts.  Connections  between  this  autonomy  and  evolution. 

After  the  broad  general  discussions  of  the  last  two  lectures  I  would 
like  to  return  to  the  subject  of  the  specific  automata  which  we  know. 
I  would  like  to  compare  artificial  automata,  specifically  computing 
machines,  with  natural  automata,  particularly  the  human  nervous 
system.  In  order  to  do  this,  I  must  say  a  few  things  in  both  cases 
about  components  and  I  must  make  certain  comparisons  of  sizes. 

As  I  mentioned  before,  in  estimating  the  size  of  the  human  nervous 
system  one  is  limited  to  a  figure  which  is  not  very  well  established, 
but  which  is  probably  right  in  its  order  of  magnitude.  This  is  the 




ROLE  OF  HIGH  COMPLICATION  65 

statement  that  there  are  1010  neurons  in  the  human  brain.  The 
number  of  nerves  present  elsewhere  in  the  human  organism  is  proba- 
bly much  smaller  than  this.  Also,  a  large  number  of  these  other 
nerves  originate  in  the  brain  anyway.  The  largest  aggregation  of 
nerves  of  the  periphery  is  on  the  retina,  and  the  optic  nerve  going 
from  the  retina  to  the  brain  is  part  of  the  brain. 

Compared  to  this,  the  number  of  vacuum  tubes  involved  in  the 
computing  machines  we  know  of  is  very  small,  a  million  times  smaller. 
The  largest  existing  computing  machine,  the  ENIAC,  has  2  X  104 
vacuum  tubes.  Another  large  computing  machine,  the  SSEC,  which 
belongs  to  the  IBM  Company,  contains  a  mixture  of  vacuum  tubes 
and  relays,  about  10  thousand  of  each.  The  fastest  computing  ma- 
chines now  under  construction  are  designed  to  have  several  thousand 
vacuum  tubes,  perhaps  3  thousand.  The  reason  for  this  difference 
in  size  between  the  ENIAC  and  the  fast  machines  now  under  con- 
struction is  a  difference  in  the  treatment  of  memory,  which  I  will 
discuss  later. 

So  the  human  nervous  system  is  roughly  a  million  times  more  - 
complicated  than  these  large  computing  machines.  The  increase  in 
complexity  from  these  computing  machines  to  the  central  nervous 
system  is  more  than  the  increase  in  complexity  from  a  single  vacuum 
tube  to  these  computing  machines.  Even  measuring  complexity  on  a 
logarithmic  scale,  which  is  highly  generous,  we  have  not  yet  come 
half  the  way.  I  think  that  in  any  sensible  definition  of  complexity, 
it  would  be  much  less  than  half  way. 

There  is,  however,  a  factor  in  favor  of  these  machines:  they're 
faster  than  the  human  brain.  The  time  in  which  a  human  nerve  can 
respond  is  about  \  millisecond.  However,  that  time  is  not  a  fair 
measure  of  the  speed  of  the  neuron,  because  what  matters  is  not  the 
time  in  which  the  neuron  responds,  but  the  time  in  which  it  recovers, 
the  time  from  one  response  to  the  next  potential  response.  That 
time  is,  at  best,  5  milliseconds.  In  the  case  of  a  vacuum  tube  it's 
difficult  to  estimate  the  speed,  but  present  designs  call  for  repetition 
rates  which  are  not  much  in  excess  of  a  million  per  second. 

Thus  the  nervous  system  has  a  million  times  as  many  components 
as  these  machines  have,  but  each  component  of  the  machine  is  about 
5  thousand  times  faster  than  a  neuron.  Counting  what  can  be  done, 
hour  by  hour,  the  nervous  system  outperforms  the  machine  by  a 
factor  of  roughly  200.  This  estimate,  however,  favors  the  automaton, 
because  an  n-fold  increase  in  size  brings  much  more  than  an  n-fold 
increase  in  what  can  be  done.  What  can  be  done  is  a  matter  of  the 
interrelationships  between  the  components,  and  the  number  of 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


interrelationships  increases  with  the  square  of  the  number  of  com- 
ponents. And  apart  from  this,  what  can  be  done  depends  on  certain 
minima.  Below  a  certain  minimum  level  of  complexity  you  cannot 
do  a  certain  thing,  but  above  this  minimum  level  of  complexity  you 
can  do  it. 

[Von  Neumann  next  compared  the  human  nervous  system  and 
computers  with  respect  to  volume.  The  decisive  factor  is  the  space  in 
which  the  control  and  amplifying  functions  are  performed.  In  the  case 
of  the  vacuum  tube  this  is  essentially  the  space  between  the  cathode 
and  the  control  grid,  which  is  of  the  order  of  magnitude  of  a  millime- 
ter. In  the  case  of  the  nerve  cell  it  is  the  thickness  of  the  nerve  mem- 
brane, which  is  of  the  order  of  1  micron.  The  ratio  in  size  is  about  1000 
to  1,  and  this  is  also  the  ratio  in  voltage,  so  that  the  intensity  of  the 
field  which  is  used  for  control  and  amplification  is  about  the  same  in 
the  vacuum  tube  and  the  nerve  cell.  This  means  that  differences  in 
total  energy  dissipation  are  mainly  due  to  differences  in  size.  "A  dis- 
crepancy of  103  in  linear  size  means  a  discrepancy  of  109  in  volume, 
and  probably  a  not  very  different  discrepancy  in  energy."  See  also 
Collected  Works  5.299-302  and  The  Computer  and  the  Brain  44-52. 

He  then  calculated  the  energy  which  is  dissipated  "per  elementary 
act  of  information,  that  is,  per  elementary  decision  of  a  two-way 
alternative  and  per  elementary  transmittal  of  1  unit  of  information." 
He  did  this  for  three  cases:  the  thermodynamical  minimum,  the 
vacuum  tube,  and  the  neuron. 

In  the  third  lecture  he  said  that  thermodynamical  information  is 
measured  by  the  logarithm,  to  the  base  two,  of  the  number  of  alterna- 
tives involved.  The  thermodynamical  information  in  the  case  of  two 
alternatives  is  thus  one,  "except  that  this  is  not  the  unit  in  which  you 
measure  energy.  Entropy  is  energy  only  if  you  specify  the  tempera- 
ture. So,  running  at  low  temperature  you  can  say  what  energy  should 
be  dissipated."  He  then  computed  the  thermodynamical  minimum 
of  energy  per  elementary  act  of  information  from  the  formula  kT 
\ogeN  ergs,  where  k  is  Boltzmann's  constant  (1.4  X  10~16  ergs  per 
degree),  T  is  the  temperature  in  absolute  units,  and  N  is  the  number 
of  alternatives.  For  a  binary  act  N  =  2,  and  taking  the  temperature 
to  be  about  300  degrees  absolute,  he  obtained  3  X  10~~14  ergs  for  the 
thermodynamical  minimum. 

Von  Neumann  then  estimated  that  the  brain  dissipates  25  watts, 
has  1010  neurons,  and  that  on  the  average  a  neuron  is  activated  about 
10  times  per  second.  Hence  the  energy  dissipation  per  binary  act  in  a 
nerve  cell  is  roughly  3  X  10~3  ergs.  He  estimated  that  a  vacuum  tube 
dissipates  6  watts,  is  activated  about  100,000  times  per  second,  and 
thus  dissipates  6  X  102  ergs  per  binary  act.] 


ROLE  OF  HIGH  COMPLICATION 




So  our  present  machinery  is  about  200  thousand  times  less  efficient 
than  the  nervous  system  is.  Computing  machines  will  be  improved  in 
the  next  few  years,  perhaps  by  replacing  vacuum  tubes  with  amplify- 
ing crystals,  but  even  then  they  will  be  of  the  order  of  10  thousand 
times  less  efficient  than  the  nervous  system.  The  remarkable  thing, 
however,  is  the  enormous  gap  between  the  thermodynamical  mini- 
mum (3  X  10~14  ergs)  and  the  energy  dissipation  per  binary  act  in  the 
neuron  (3  X  10~3  ergs).  The  factor  here  is  1011.  This  shows  that  the 
thermodynamical  analysis  is  missing  a  large  part  of  the  story.  Meas- 
ured on  a  logarithmic  scale,  the  gap  between  our  instrumentation, 
which  is  obviously  amateurish,  and  the  procedures  of  nature,  which 
show  a  professional  touch,  is  about  half  the  gap  between  the  best 
devices  we  know  about  and  the  thermodynamical  minimum.  What 
this  gap  is  due  to  I  don't  know.  I  suspect  that  it's  due  to  something 
like  a  desire  for  reliability  of  operation. 

Thus,  for  an  elementary  act  of  information,  nature  does  not  use  ,„ 
what,  from  the  point  of  view  of  physics,  is  an  elementary  system  with 
two  stable  states,  such  as  a  hydrogen  atom.  All  the  switching  organs 
used  are  much  larger.  If  nature  really  operated  with  these  elementary 
systems,  switching  organs  would  have  dimensions  of  the  order  of  a 
few  angstroms,  while  the  smallest  switching  organs  we  know  have  di- 
mensions of  the  order  of  thousands  or  tens  of  thousands  of  angstroms. 
There  is  obviously  something  which  forces  one  to  use  organs  several 
orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  is  required  by  the  strict  thermo- 
dynamical argument.  Thus,  though  the  observation  that  information 
is  entropy  tells  an  important  part  of  the  story,  it  by  no  means  tells  the 
whole  story.  There  is  a  factor  of  1011  still  to  be  accounted  for. 

[Von  Neumann  then  discussed  memory  components.  Vacuum 
tubes,  which  are  switching  organs,  may  be  used  for  memory.  But 
since  the  standard  circuit  for  storing  a  binary  digit  has  two  tubes,  and 
additional  tubes  are  needed  for  transmitting  the  information  in  and 
out,  it  is  not  feasible  to  build  a  large  memory  out  of  vacuum  tubes. 
"The  actual  devices  which  are  used  are  of  such  a  nature  that  the 
store  is  effected,  not  in  a  macroscopic  object  like  a  vacuum  tube,  but 
in  something  which  is  microscopic  and  has  only  a  virtual  existence.' ' 
Von  Neumann  describes  two  devices  of  this  sort:  acoustic  delay  line 
storage  and  cathode  ray  tube  storage. 

An  acoustic  delay  line  is  a  tube  which  is  filled  with  a  medium  such 
as  mercury  and  which  has  a  piezo-electric  crystal  at  each  end.  When 
the  transmitting  crystal  is  stimulated  electrically,  it  produces  an 
acoustic  wave  that  travels  through  the  mercury  and  causes  the  re- 
ceiving crystal  to  produce  an  electrical  signal.  This  signal  is  amplified, 
reshaped,  and  retimed  and  sent  to  the  transmitting  crystal  again. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


This  acoustic-electrical  cycle  can  be  repeated  indefinitely,  thereby 
providing  storage.  A  binary  digit  is  represented  by  the  presence  or 
absence  of  a  pulse  at  a  given  position  at  a  given  time,  and  since  the 
pulses  circulate  around  the  system,  the  digit  is  not  stored  in  any  fixed 
position.  "The  thing  which  remembers  is  nowhere  in  particular." 

Information  may  be  stored  in  a  cathode  ray  tube  in  the  form  of 
electric  charges  on  the  inside  surface  of  the  tube.  A  binary  digit  is 
represented  by  the  charge  stored  in  a  small  area.  These  charges  are 
deposited  and  sensed  by  means  of  the  electron  beam  of  the  cathode 
ray  tube.  Since  the  area  associated  with  a  given  binary  digit  must  be 
recharged  frequently,  and  since  this  area  may  be  moved  by  changing 
the  position  of  the  electron  beam,  this  memory  is  also  virtual.  "The 
site  of  the  memory  is  really  nowhere  organically,  and  the  mode  of 
control  produces  the  memory  organ  in  a  virtual  sense,  because  no 
permanent  physical  changes  ever  occur."] 

There's  therefore  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  memory  of  the 
central  nervous  system  is  in  the  switching  organs  (the  neurons).  The 
size  of  the  human  memory  must  be  very  great,  much  greater  than 
1010  binary  units.  If  you  count  the  impressions  which  a  human  gets  in 
his  life  or  other  things  which  appear  to  be  critical,  you  obtain  numbers 
like  1015.  One  cannot  place  much  faith  in  these  estimates,  but  I  think 
it  likely  that  the  memory  capacity  of  the  human  nervous  system  is 
greater  than  1010.  I  don't  know  how  legitimate  it  is  to  transfer  our 
experience  with  computing  machines  to  natural  systems,  but  if  our 
experience  is  worth  anything  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  natural 
memory  should  be  in  switching  organs  or  should  consist  of  anything 
as  unsophisticated  and  crude  as  the  modification  of  a  switching  organ. 
It  has  been  suggested  that  memory  consists  in  a  change  of  threshold 
at  a  synapse.  I  don't  know  if  this  is  true,  but  the  memory  of  comput- 
ing machines  does  not  consist  of  bending  a  grid.  A  comparison  be- 
tween artificial  automata  and  the  central  nervous  system  makes  it 
probable  that  the  memory  of  the  latter  is  more  sophisticated  and  more 
virtual  than  this.  Therefore,  I  think  that  all  guesses  about  what  the 
memory  of  the  human  organism  is,  and  where  it  sits,  are  premature. 

Another  thing  of  which  I  would  like  to  talk  is  this.  I  have  been 
talking  as  if  a  nerve  cell  were  really  a  pure  switching  organ.  It  has 
been  pointed  out  by  many  experts  in  neurology  and  adjacent  fields 
that  the  nerve  cell  is  not  a  pure  switching  organ  but  a  very  delicate 
continuous  organ.  In  the  lingo  of  computing  machinery  one  would 
say  it  is  an  analog  device  that  can  do  vastly  more  than  transmit  or 
not  transmit  a  pulse.  There  is  a  possible  answer  to  this,  namely,  that 
vacuum  tubes,  electromechanical  relays,  etc.  are  not  switching  devices 


ROLE  OF  HIGH  COMPLICATION 




either,  since  they  have  continuous  properties.  They  are  all  charac- 
terized by  this,  however,  that  there  is  at  least  one  way  to  run  them 
where  they  have  essentially  an  all-or-none  response.  What  matters  is 
how  the  component  runs  when  the  organism  is  functioning  normally. 
Now  nerve  cells  do  not  usually  run  as  all-or-none  organs.  For  in- 
stance, the  method  of  translating  a  stimulus  intensity  into  a  fre- 
quency of  response  depends  on  fatigue  and  the  time  of  recovery,  which 
is  a  continuous  or  analog  response.  However,  it  is  quite  clear  that 
the  all-or-none  character  of  a  neuron  is  a  very  important  part  of  the 
story. 

The  human  organism  is  not  a  digital  organ  either,  though  one  part 
of  it,  the  nervous  system,  is  essentially  digital.  Almost  all  the  nervous 
stimuli  end  in  organs  which  are  not  digital,  such  as  a  contracting 
muscle  or  an  organ  which  causes  secretions  to  produce  a  chemical. 
To  control  the  production  of  a  chemical  and  rely  on  the  diffusion  rate 
of  a  chemical  is  to  employ  a  much  more  sophisticated  analog  pro- 
6edure  than  we  ever  use  in  analog  computing  machines.  The  most 
important  loops  in  the  human  system  are  of  this  nature.  A  system  of 
nervous  stimuli  goes  through  a  complicated  network  of  nerves  and 
then  controls  the  operation  of  what  is  essentially  a  chemical  factory. 
The  chemicals  are  distributed  by  a  very  complicated  hydrodynamical 
system,  which  is  completely  analog.  These  chemicals  produce  nerv- 
ous stimuli  which  travel  in  a  digital  manner  through  the  nervous 
system.  There  are  loops  where  this  change  from  digital  into  analog 
occurs  several  times.  So  the  human  organism  is  essentially  a  mixed 
system.  But  this  does  not  decrease  the  necessity  for  understanding 
the  digital  part  of  it. 

Computing  machines  aren't  purely  digital  either.  The  way  we  run 
them  now,  their  inputs  and  outputs  are  digital.  But  it's  quite  clear 
that  we  need  certain  non-digital  inputs  and  outputs.  It's  frequently 
desirable  to  display  the  result,  not  in  digits,  but,  say,  as  a  curve  on 
an  oscilloscope  screen.  This  is  an  analog  output.  Moreover,  I  think 
that  the  important  applications  of  these  devices  will  come  when  you 
can  use  them  to  control  complicated  machinery,  for  example,  the 
flight  of  a  missile  or  of  a  plane.  In  this  case  the  inputs  will  come  from 
an  analog  source  and  the  outputs  will  control  an  analog  process. 
This  whole  trans-continuous  alternation  between  digital  and  analog 
mechanisms  is  probably  characteristic  of  every  field. 

The  digital  aspect  of  automata  should  be  emphasized  at  the  present 
time,  for  we  now  have  some  logical  tools  to  deal  with  digital  mech- 
anisms, and  our  understanding  of  digital  mechanisms  is  behind  our 
understanding  of  analog  mechanisms.  Also,  it  appears  that  digital 




THEORY  OF  SELF-KEPKODUCING  AUTOMATA 


mechanisms  are  necessary  for  coin  plicated  functions.  Pure  analog 
mechanisms  are  usually  not  suited  for  very  complicated  situations. 
The  only  way  to  handle  a  complicated  situation  with  analog  mech- 
anisms is  to  break  it  up  into  parts  and  deal  with  the  parts  separately 
and  alternately,  and  this  is  a  digital  trick. 

Let  me  now  come  to  the  following  question.  Our  artificial  automata 
are  much  smaller  than  natural  automata  in  what  they  do  and  in  the 
number  of  components  they  have,  and  they're  phenomenally  more 
expensive  in  terms  of  space  and  energy.  Why  is  this  so?  It's  mani- 
festly hopeless  to  produce  a  true  answer  at  the  present  time:  We  can 
hardly  explain  why  two  objects  are  different  if  we  understand  one  a 
little  and  the  other  not  at  all.  However,  there  are  some  obvious  dis- 
crepancies in  the  tools  with  which  we  operate,  which  make  it  clear 
that  we  would  have  difficulty  in  going  much  further  with  these  tools. 

The  materials  which  we  are  using  are  by  their  very  nature  not  well 
suited  for  the  small  dimensions  nature  uses.  Our  combinations  of 
metals,  insulators,  and  vacuums  are  much  more  unstable  than  the 
materials  used  by  nature;  that  they  have  higher  tensile  strengths  is 
completely  incidental.  If  a  membrane  is  damaged  it  will  reconstruct 
itself,  but  if  a  vacuum  tube  develops  a  short  between  its  grid  and 
cathode  it  will  not  reconstruct  itself.  Thus  the  natural  materials 
have  some  sort  of  mechanical  stability  and  are  well  balanced  with 
respect  to  mechanical  properties,  electrical  properties,  and  reliability 
requirements.  Our  artificial  systems  are  patchworks  in  which  we 
achieve  desirable  electrical  traits  at  the  price  of  mechanically  unsound 
things.  We  use  techniques  which  are  excellent  for  fitting  metal  to 
metal  but  are  not  very  good  for  fitting  metal  to  vacuum.  To  obtain 
millimeter  spacings  in  an  inaccessible  vacuum  space  is  a  great  me- 
chanical achievement,  and  we  will  not  be  able  to  decrease  the  size  by 
large  factors  here.  And  so  the  differences  in  size  between  artificial 
and  natural  automata  are  probably  connected  essentially  with  quite 
radical  differences  in  materials. 

[  Von  Neumann  proceeded  to  discuss  what  he  thought  was  a  deeper 
cause  of  the  discrepancy  in  size  between  natural  and  artificial  auto- 
mata. This  is  that  many  of  the  components  of  the  natural  system  \/ 
serve  to  make  the  system  reliable.  As  he  noted  in  the  third  lecture, 
actual  computing  elements  function  correctly  with  a  certain  proba- 
bility only,  not  with  certainty.  In  small  systems  the  probability 
that  the  whole  system  will  behave  incorrectly  is  relatively  small  and 
may  often  be  neglected,  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  large  systems. 
Thus  error  considerations  become  more  important  as  the  system  be- 
comes more  complex. 

Von  Neumann  made  some  very  rough  calculations  to  justify  this 


ROLE  OF  HIGH  COMPLICATION 




conclusion.  Assuming  that  the  system  is  designed  in  such  a  way  that 
the  failure  of  a  single  element  would  result  in  failure  of  the  whole 
system,  he  calculated  the  error  probability  required  for  a  given  mean 
free  path  between  system  errors.  For  the  human  nervous  system  he 
used  the  following  figures:  1010  neurons;  each  neuron  activated  10 
times  per  second  on  the  average;  a  mean  free  path  between  fatal 
errors  of  60  years  (the  average  life  span).  Since  60  years  is  about 
2  X  109  seconds,  the  product  of  these  numbers  is  2  X  1020.  Hence 
an  error  probability  of  0.5  X  10~20  for  each  activation  of  an  element 
is  required  under  these  assumptions.  For  a  digital  computer  he  used 
the  figures:  5  X  103  vacuum  tubes,  105  activations  per  tube  per  sec- 
ond, and  a  desired  mean  free  path  between  system  errors  of  7  hours 
(about  2  X  104  seconds).  An  error  probability  of  10~13  per  tube  ac- 
tivation is  required  for  this  degree  of  reliability.  Compare  the  calcu- 
lations at  Collected  Works  5.366-367. 

He  pointed  out  that  vacuum  tubes,  and  artificial  components 
generally,  do  not  have  an  error  probability  as  low  as  10~13,  and  that 
neurons  probably  do  not  either.  We  try  to  design  computing  ma- 
chines so  that  they  will  stop  when  they  make  an  error  and  the  opera- 
tor can  then  locate  it  and  correct  it.  For  example,  a  computer  may 
perform  a  certain  operation  twice,  compare  the  results,  and  stop  if 
the  results  differ.] 

It's  very  likely  that  on  the  basis  of  the  philosophy  that  every  error 
has  to  be  caught,  explained,  and  corrected,  a  system  of  the  complexity 
of  the  living  organism  would  not  run  for  a  millisecond.  Such  a  system 
is  so  well  integrated  that  it  can  operate  across  errors.  An  error  in  it 
does  not  in  general  indicate  a  degenerative  tendency.  The  system  is 
sufficiently  flexible  and  well  organized  that  as  soon  as  an  error  shows 
up  in  any  part  of  it,  the  system  automatically  senses  whether  this 
error  matters  or  not.  If  it  doesn't  matter,  the  system  continues  to 
operate  without  paying  any  attention  to  it.  If  the  error  seems  to  the 
system  to  be  important,  the  system  blocks  that  region  out,  by-passes 
it,  and  proceeds  along  other  channels.  The  system  then  analyzes  the 
region  separately  at  leisure  and  corrects  what  goes  on  there,  and  if 
correction  is  impossible  the  system  just  blocks  the  region  off  and  by- 
passes it  forever.  The  duration  of  operability  of  the  automaton  is 
determined  by  the  time  it  takes  until  so  many  incurable  errors  have 
occurred,  so  many  alterations  and  permanent  by-passes  have  been 
made,  that  finally  the  operability  is  really  impaired.  This  is  a  com- 
pletely different  philosophy  from  the  philosophy  which  proclaims 
that  the  end  of  the  world  is  at  hand  as  soon  as  the  first  error  has 
occurred. 

To  apply  the  philosophy  underlying  natural  automata  to  artificial 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


automata  we  must  understand  complicated  mechanisms  better  than 
we  do,  we  must  have  more  elaborate  statistics  about  what  goes  wrong, 
and  we  must  have  much  more  perfect  statistical  information  about 
the  milieu  in  which  a  mechanism  lives  than  we  now  have,  ^m^iiaiigm^ 
■^akmcan  not  be  separated  from  the  milieu  to  which  it  responds. 
By  that  1  mean  that  it's  meaningless  to  say  that  an  automaton  is 
good  or  bad,  fast  or  slow,  reliable  or  unreliable,  without  telling  in 
what  milieu  it  operates.  The  characteristics  of  a  human  for  survival 
are  well  defined  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  in  its  present  state,  though 
for  most  types  of  humans  you  must  actually  specialize  the  situation 
a  little  further  than  this.  But  it  is  meaningless  to  argue  how  the  hu- 
man would  survive  on  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  or  in  a  temperature  of 
1000  degrees  centigrade.  Similarly,  in  discussing  a  computing  machine 
it  is  meaningless  to  ask  how  fast  or  how  slow  it  is,  unless  you  specify 
what  type  of  problems  will  be  given  to  it. 

It  makes  an  enormous  difference  whether  a  computing  machine 
is  designed,  say,  for  more  or  less  typical  problems  of  mathematical 
analysis,  or  for  number  theory,  or  combinatorics,  or  for  translating 
a  text.  We  have  an  approximate  idea  of  how  to  design  a  machine  to 
handle  the  typical  general  problems  of  mathematical  analysis.  I 
doubt  that  we  will  produce  a  machine  which  is  very  good  for  number 
theory  except  on  the  basis  of  our  present  knowledge  of  the  statistical 
properties  of  number  theory.  I  think  we  have  very  little  idea  as  to 
how  to  design  good  machines  for  combinatorics  and  translation. 

What  matters  is  that  the  statistical  properties  of  problems  of 
mathematical  analysis  are  reasonably  well  known,  and  as  far  as  we 
know,  reasonably  homogeneous.  Consider  some  problems  in  mathe- 
matical analysis  which  look  fairly  different  from  each  other  and  which 
by  mathematical  standards  are  very  different:  finding  the  roots  of  an 
equation  of  the  tenth  order,  inverting  a  matrix  of  the  twentieth  order, 
solving  a  proper  value  problem,  solving  an  integral  equation,  or 
solving  an  integral  differential  equation.  These  problems  are  sur- 
prisingly homogeneous  with  respect  to  the  statistical  properties  which 
matter  for  a  computing  machine:  the  fraction  of  multiplications  to 
other  operations,  the  number  of  memory  references  per  multiplication, 
and  the  optimal  hierarchic  structure  of  the  memory  with  respect  to 
access  time.  There's  vastly  less  homogeneity  in  number  theory.  There 
are  viewpoints  under  which  number  theory  is  homogeneous,  but  we 
don't  know  them. 

So,  it  is  true  for  all  these  automata  that  you  can  only  assign  them 
a  value  in  combination  with  the  milieu  which  they  have  to  face. 
Natural  automata  are  much  better  suited  to  their  milieu  than  any 


ROLE  OF  HIGH  COMPLICATION 




artifacts  we  know.  It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  we  are  not  too 
far  from  the  limits  of  complication  which  can  be  achieved  in  artificial 
automata  without  really  fundamental  insights  into  a  theory  of  in- 
formation, although  one  should  be  very  careful  with  such  statements 
because  they  can  sound  awfully  ridiculous  5  years  later. 

[  Von  Neumann  then  explained  why  computing  machines  are  de- 
signed to  stop  when  a  single  error  occurs.  The  fault  must  be  located 
and  corrected  by  the  engineer,  and  it  is  very  difficult  for  him  to  lo- 
calize a  fault  if  there  are  several  of  them.  If  there  is  only  one  fault 
he  can  often  divide  the  machine  into  two  parts  and  determine  which 
part  made  the  error.  This  process  can  be  repeated  until  he  isolates 
the  fault.  This  general  method  becomes  much  more  complicated  if 
there  are  two  or  three  faults,  and  breaks  down  when  there  are  many 
faults.] 

The  fact  that  natural  organisms  have  such  a  radically  different 
attitude  about  errors  and  behave  so  differently  when  an  error  occurs 
is  probably  connected  with  some  other  traits  of  natural  organisms, 
which  are  entirely  absent  from  our  automata.  The  ability  of  a  natural 
organism  to  survive  in  spite  of  a  high  incidence  of  error  (which  our 
artificial  automata  are  incapable  of)  probably  requires  a  very  high 
flexibility  and  ability  of  the  automaton  to  watch  itself  and  reorganize 
itself.  And  this  probably  requires  a  very  considerable  autonomy  of 
parts.  There  is  a  high  autonomy  of  parts  in  the  human  nervous  sys- 
tem. This  autonomy  of  parts  of  a  system  has  an  effect  which  is  ob- 
servable in  the  human  nervous  system  but  not  in  artificial  automata. 
When  parts  are  autonomous  and  able  to  reorganize  themselves,  when 
there  are  several  organs  each  capable  of  taking  control  in  an  emer- 
gency, an  antagonistic  relation  can  develop  between  the  parts  so  that 
they  are  no  longer  friendly  and  cooperative.  It  is  quite  likely  that 
all  these  phenomena  are  connected. 


Fifth  Lecture 


RE -  EVALUATION  OF  THE  PROBLEMS 
OF  COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA- 
PROBLEMS  OF  HIERARCHY 
AND  EVOLUTION 


Analysis  of  componentry  and  analysis  of  integration.  Although  these  parts 
have  to  appear  together  in  a  complete  theory,  the  present  state  of  our  informa- 
tion does  not  justify  this  yet. 

The  first  problem:  Reasons  for  not  going  into  it  in  detail  here.  Questions 
of  principle  regarding  the  nature  of  relay  organs. 

The  second  problem:  Coincides  with  a  theory  of  information  and  of  auto- 
mata. Reconsideration  of  the  broader  program  regarding  a  theoretical  discus- 
sion of  automata  as  indicated  at  the  end  of  the  second  lecture. 

Synthesis  of  automata.  Automata  which  can  effect  such  syntheses. 

The  intuitive  concept  of  "complication."  Surmise  of  its  degenerative 
character:  In  connection  with  descriptions  of  processes  by  automata  and  in 
connection  with  syntheses  of  automata  by  automata. 

Qualifications  and  difficulties  regarding  this  concept  of  degeneracy. 

Rigorous  discussion:  Automata  and  their  "elementary"  parts.  Definition 
and  listing  of  elementary  parts.  Synthesis  of  automata  by  automata.  The 
problem  of  self -reproduction. 

Main  types  of  constructive  automata  which  are  relevant  in  this  connection : 
The  concept  of  a  general  instruction.  The  general  constructive  automaton 
which  can  follow  an  instruction.  The  general  copying  automaton.  The  self- 
reproducing  combination. 

Self-reproduction  combined  with  synthesis  of  other  automata:  The  en- 
zymatic function.  Comparison  with  the  known  major  traits  of  genetic  and 
mutation  mechanisms. 

The  questions  on  which  IVe  talked  so  far  all  bear  on  automata 
whose  operations  are  not  directed  at  themselves,  so  that  they  produce 
results  which  are  of  a  completely  different  character  than  themselves. 
This  is  obvious  in  each  of  the  three  cases  I  have  referred  to. 

It  is  evident  in  the  case  of  a  Turing  automaton,  which  is  a  box 
with  a  finite  number  of  states.  Its  outputs  are  modifications  of  another 
entity,  which,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  I  call  a  punched  tape. 




COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA — HIERARCHY  AND  EVOLUTION  75 

This  tape  is  not  itself  an  object  which  has  states  between  which  it 
can  move  of  its  own  accord.  Furthermore,  it  is  not  finite,  but  is  as- 
sumed to  be  infinite  in  both  directions.  Thus  this  tape  is  qualitatively 
completely  different  from  the  automaton  which  does  the  punching, 
and  so  the  automaton  is  working  into  a  qualitatively  different  me- 
dium. 

This  is  equally  true  for  the  automata  discussed  by  McCulloch  and 
Pitts,  which  are  made  of  units,  called  neurons,  that  produce  pulses. 
The  inputs  and  outputs  of  these  automata  are  not  the  neurons  but 
the  pulses.  It  is  true  that  these  pulses  may  go  to  peripheral  organs, 
thereby  producing  entirely  different  reactions.  But  even  there  one 
primarily  thinks,  say,  of  feeding  the  pulses  into  motor  or  secretory 
organs,  so  it  is  still  true  that  the  inputs  and  outputs  are  completely 
different  from  the  automaton  itself. 

finally,  it  is  entirely  true  for  computing  machines,  which  can  be 
thought  of  as  machines  which  are  fed,  and  emit,  some  medium  like 
punched  tape.  Of  course,  I  do  not  consider  it  essentially  different 
whether  the  medium  is  a  punched  card,  a  magnetic  wire,  a  magnetized 
metal  tape  with  many  channels  on  it,  or  a  piece  of  film  with  points 
photographed  on  it.  In  all  these  cases  the  medium  which  is  fed  to 
the  automaton  and  which  is  produced  by  the  automaton  is  completely 
different  from  the  automaton.  In  fact,  the  automaton  doesn't  produce 
any  medium  at  all;  it  merely  modifies  a  medium  which  is  completely 
different  from  it.  One  can  also  imagine  a  computing  machine  with 
an  output  of  pulses  which  are  fed  to  control  completely  different 
entities.  But  again,  the  automaton  is  completely  different  from  the 
electrical  pulses  it  emits.  So  there's  this  qualitative  difference. 

A  complete  discussion  of  automata  can  be  obtained  only  by  taking 
a  broader  view  of  these  things  and  considering  automata  which  can 
have  outputs  something  like  themselves.  Now,  one  has  to  be  careful 
what  one  means  by  this.  There  is  no  question  of  producing  matter 
out  of  nothing.  Rather,  one  imagines  automata  which  can  modify 
objects  similar  to  themselves,  or  effect  syntheses  by  picking  up  parts 
and  putting  them  together,  or  take  synthesized  entities  apart.  In 
order  to  discuss  these  things,  one  has  to  imagine  a  formal  set-up  like 
this.  Draw  up  a  list  of  unambiguously  defined  elementary  parts. 
Imagine  that  there  is  a  practically  unlimited  supply  of  these  parts 
floating  around  in  a  large  container.  One  can  then  imagine  an  autom- 
aton functioning  in  the  following  manner:  It  also  is  floating  around 
in  this  medium ;  its  essential  activity  is  to  pick  up  parts  and  put  them 
together,  or,  if  aggregates  of  parts  are  found,  to  take  them  apart. 

This  is  an  axiomatically  shortened  and  simplified  description  of 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


what  an  organism  does.  It's  true  that  this  view  has  certain  limitations, 
but  they  are  not  fundamentally  different  from  the  inherent  limitations 
of  the  axiomatic  method.  Any  result  one  might  reach  in  this  manner 
will  depend  quite  essentially  on  how  one  has  chosen  to  define  the 
elementary  parts.  It  is  a  commonplace  of  all  axiomatic  methods  that 
it  is  very  difficult  to  give  rigorous  rules  as  to  how  one  should  choose 
the  elementary  parts,  so  that  whether  the  choice  of  the  elements  was 
reasonable  is  a  matter  of  common  sense  judgment.  There  is  no  rigorous 
description  of  what  choice  is  reasonable  and  what  choice  is  not. 

First  of  all,  one  may  define  parts  in  such  numbers,  and  each  of 
them  so  large  and  involved,  that  one  has  defined  the  whole  problem 
away.  If  you  chose  to  define  as  elementary  objects  things  which  are 
analogous  to  whole  living  organisms,  then  you  obviously  have  killed 
the  problem,  because  you  would  have  to  attribute  to  these  parts 
just  those  functions  of  the  living  organism  which  you  would  like  to 
describe  or  to  understand.  So,  by  choosing  the  parts  too  large,  by 
attributing  too  many  and  too  complex  functions  to  them,  you  lose 
the  problem  at  the  moment  of  defining  it. 

One  also  loses  the  problem  by  defining  the  parts  too  small,  for 
instance,  by  insisting  that  nothing  larger  than  a  single  molecule, 
single  atom,  or  single  elementary  particle  will  rate  as  a  part.  In  this 
case  one  would  probably  get  completely  bogged  down  in  questions 
which,  while  very  important  and  interesting,  are  entirely  anterior 
to  our  problem.  We  are  interested  here  in  organizational  questions 
about  complicated  organisms,  and  not  in  questions  about  the  struc- 
ture of  matter  or  the  quantum  mechanical  background  of  valency 
chemistry.  So,  it  is  clear  that  one  has  to  use  some  common  sense 
criteria  about  choosing  the  parts  neither  too  large  nor  too  small. 

Even  if  one  chooses  the  parts  in  the  right  order  of  magnitude,  there 
are  many  ways  of  choosing  them,  none  of  which  is  intrinsically  much 
better  than  any  other.  There  is  in  formal  logics  a  very  similar  diffi- 
culty, that  the  whole  system  requires  an  agreement  on  axioms,  and 
that  there  are  no  rigorous  rules  on  how  axioms  should  be  chosen, 
just  the  common  sense  rules  that  one  would  like  to  get  the  system 
one  is  interested  in  and  would  not  like  to  state  in  his  axioms  either 
things  which  are  really  terminal  theorems  of  his  theory  or  things 
which  belong  to  vastly  anterior  fields.  For  example,  in  axiomatizing 
geometry  one  should  assume  theorems  from  set  theory,  because  one 
is  not  interested  in  how  to  get  from  sets  to  numbers,  or  from  numbers 
to  geometry.  Again,  one  does  not  choose  the  more  sophisticated 
theorems  of  analytic  number  theory  as  axioms  of  geometry,  because 
one  wants  to  cut  in  at  an  earlier  point. 


COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA — HIERARCHY  AND  EVOLUTION  77 

Even  if  the  axioms  are  chosen  within  the  common  sense  area,  it  is 
usually  very  difficult  to  achieve  an  agreement  between  two  people 
who  have  done  this  independently.  For  instance,  in  the  literature  of 
formal  logics  there  are  about  as  many  notations  as  there  are  authors, 
and  anybody  who  has  used  a  notation  for  a  few  weeks  feels  that  it's 
more  or  less  superior  to  any  other.  So,  while  the  choice  of  notations, 
of  the  elements,  is  enormously  important  and  absolutely  basic  for 
an  application  of  the  axiomatic  method,  this  choice  is  neither  rigor- 
ously justifiable  nor  humanly  unambiguously  justifiable.  All  one  can 
do  is  to  try  to  submit  a  system  which  will  stand  up  under  common 
sense  criteria.  I  will  give  an  indication  of  how  one  system  can  be 
constructed,  but  I  want  to  emphasize  very  strongly  how  relatively 
I  state  this  system. 

I  will  introduce  as  elementary  units  neurons,  a  "muscle,"  entities 
which  make  and  cut  fixed  contacts,  and  entities  which  supply  energy, 
all  defined  with  about  that  degree  of  superficiality  with  which  the 
formal  theory  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts  describes  an  actual  neuron. 
If  you  describe  muscles,  connective  tissues,  "disconnecting  tissues," 
and  means  of  providing  metabolic  energy,  all  with  this  degree  of 
schematization,  you  wind  up  with  a  system  of  elements  with  which 
you  can  work  in  a  reasonably  uncomplicated  manner.  You  probably 
wind  up  with  something  like  10  or  12  or  15  elementary  parts. 

By  axiomatizing  automata  in  this  manner,  one  has  thrown  half 
of  the  problem  out  the  window,  and  it  may  be  the  more  important 
half.  One  has  resigned  oneself  not  to  explain  how  these  parts  are 
made  up  of  real  things,  specifically,  how  these  parts  are  made  up  of 
actual  elementary  particles,  or  even  of  higher  chemical  molecules. 
One  does  not  ask  the  most  intriguing,  exciting,  and  important  ques- 
tion of  why  the  molecules  or  aggregates  which  in  nature  really  occur 
in  these  parts  are  the  sort  of  things  they  are,  why  they  are  essentially 
very  large  molecules  in  some  cases  but  large  aggregations  in  other 
cases,  why  they  always  lie  in  a  range  beginning  at  a  few  microns  and 
ending  at  a  few  decimeters.  This  is  a  very  peculiar  range  for  an  ele- 
mentary object,  since  it  is,  even  on  a  linear  scale,  at  least  five  powers 
of  ten  away  from  the  sizes  of  really  elementary  entities. 

These  things  will  not  be  explained;  we  will  simply  assume  that 
elementary  parts  with  certain  properties  exist.  The  question  that 
one  can  then  hope  to  answer,  or  at  least  investigate,  is:  What  prin- 
ciples are  involved  in  organizing  these  elementary  parts  into  func- 
tioning organisms,  what  are  the  traits  of  such  organisms,  and  what 
are  the  essential  quantitative  characteristics  of  such  organisms?  I 
will  discuss  the  matter  entirely  from  this  limited  point  of  view. 


78  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

[At  this  point  von  Neumann  made  the  remarks  on  information, 
logic,  thermodynamics,  and  balance  which  now  appear  at  the  end  of 
the  Third  Lecture.  They  are  placed  there  because  that  is  where  von 
Neumann's  detailed  outline  located  them.  Those  remarks  are  relevant 
to  the  present  discussion  because  the  concept  of  complication  which 
von  Neumann  introduced  next  belongs  to  information  theory.] 

There  is  a  concept  which  will  be  quite  useful  here,  of  which  we  have 
a  certain  intuitive  idea,  but  which  is  vague,  unscientific,  and  imper- 
fect. This  concept  clearly  belongs  to  the  subject  of  information,  and 
quasi-thermodynamical  considerations  are  relevant  to  it.  I  know  no 
adequate  name  for  it,  but  it  is  best  described  by  calling  it  "complica- 
tion."  It  is  effectivity  in  complication,  or  the  potentiality  to  do  things. 
I  am  not  thinking  about  how  involved  the  object  is,  but  how  involved 
its  purposive  operations  are.  In  this  sense,  an  object  is  of  the  highest 
degree  of  complexity  if  it  can  do  very  difficult  and  involved  things. 

I  mention  this  because  when  you  consider  automata  whose  normal 
function  is  to  synthesize  other  automata  from  elementary  parts 
(living  organisms  and  such  familiar  artificial  automata  as  machine 
tools),  you  find  the  following  remarkable  thing.  There  are  two  states 
of  mind,  in  each  of  which  one  can  put  himself  in  a  minute,  and  in 
each  of  which  we  feel  that  a  certain  statement  is  obvious.  But  each 
of  these  two  statements  is  the  opposite  or  negation  of  the  other! 

Anybody  who  looks  at  living  organisms  knows  perfectly  well  that 
they  can  produce  other  organisms  like  themselves.  This  is  their  nor- 
mal function,  they  wouldn't  exist  if  they  didn't  do  this,  and  it's 
plausible  that  this  is  the  reason  why  they  abound  in  the  world.  In 
other  words,  living  organisms  are  very  complicated  aggregations  of 
elementary  parts,  and  by  any  reasonable  theory  of  probability  or 
thermodynamics  highly  improbable.  That  they  should  occur  in  the 
world  at  all  is  a  miracle  of  the  first  magnitude;  the  only  thing  which 
removes,  or  mitigates,  this  miracle  is  that  they  reproduce  themselves. 
Therefore,  if  by  any  peculiar  accident  there  should  ever  be  one  of 
them,  from  there  on  the  rules  of  probability  do  not  apply,  and  there 
will  be  many  of  them,  at  least  if  the  milieu  is  reasonable.  But  a  reason- 
able milieu  is  already  a  thermodynamically  much  less  improbable 
thing.  So,  the  operations  of  probability  somehow  leave  a  loophole  at 
this  point,  and  it  is  by  the  process  of  self -reproduction  that  they  are 
pierced. 

Furthermore,  it's  equally  evident  that  what  goes  on  is  actually  one 
degree  better  than  self -reproduction,  for  organisms  appear  to  have 
gotten  more  elaborate  in  the  course  of  time.  Today's  organisms  are 
phylogenetically  descended  from  others  which  were  vastly  simpler 


COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA — HIERARCHY  AND  EVOLUTION  79 

than  they  are,  so  much  simpler,  in  fact,  that  it's  inconceivable  how 
any  kind  of  description  of  the  later,  complex  organism  could  have 
existed  in  the  earlier  one.  It's  not  easy  to  imagine  in  what  sense  a 
gene,  which  is  probably  a  low  order  affair,  can  contain  a  description 
of  the  human  being  which  will  come  from  it.  But  in  this  case  you  can 
say  that  since  the  gene  has  its  effect  only  within  another  human  or- 
ganism, it  probably  need  not  contain  a  complete  description  of  what 
is  to  happen,  but  only  a  few  cues  for  a  few  alternatives.  However, 
this  is  not  so  in  phylogenetic  evolution.  That  starts  from  simple 
entities,  surrounded  by  an  unliving  amorphous  milieu,  and  produces 
something  more  complicated.  Evidently,  these  organisms  have  the 
ability  to  produce  something  more  complicated  than  themselves. 

The  other  line  of  argument,  which  leads  to  the  opposite  conclusion, 
arises  from  looking  at  artificial  automata.  Everyone  knows  that  a 
machine  tool  is  more  complicated  than  the  elements  which  can  be 
made  with  it,  and  that,  generally  speaking,  an  automaton  A,  which 
can  make  an  automaton  B,  must  contain  a  complete  description  of 
B  and  also  rules  on  how  to  behave  while  effecting  the  synthesis.  So, 
one  gets  a  very  strong  impression  that  complication,  or  productive 
potentiality  in  an  organization,  is  degenerative,  that  an  organization 
which  synthesizes  something  is  necessarily  more  complicated,  of  a 
higher  order,  than  the  organization  it  synthesizes.  This  conclusion, 
arrived  at  by  considering  artificial  automata,  is  clearly  opposite  to 
our  early  conclusion,  arrived  at  by  considering  living  organisms. 

I  think  that  some  relatively  simple  combinatorial  discussions  of 
artificial  automata  can  contribute  to  mitigating  this  dilemma.  Ap- 
pealing to  the  organic,  living  world  does  not  help  us  greatly,  because 
we  do  not  understand  enough  about  how  natural  organisms  function. 
We  will  stick  to  automata  which  we  know  completely  because  we 
made  them,  either  actual  artificial  automata  or  paper  automata 
described  completely  by  some  finite  set  of  logical  axioms.  It  is  possible 
in  this  domain  to  describe  automata  which  can  reproduce  themselves. 
So  at  least  one  can  show  that  on  the  site  where  one  would  expect 
complication  to  be  degenerative  it  is  not  necessarily  degenerative  at 
all,  and,  in  fact,  the  production  of  a  more  complicated  object  from  a 
less  complicated  object  is  possible. 

The  conclusion  one  should  draw  from  this  is  that  complication  is 
degenerative  below  a  certain  minimum  level.  This  conclusion  is  quite 
in  harmony  with  other  results  in  formal  logics,  to  which  I  have  re- 
ferred a  few  times  earlier  during  these  lectures.1  We  do  not  now  know 

1  [  See  the  end  of  the  Second  Lecture.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


what  complication  is,  or  how  to  measure  it,  but  I  think  that'  some- 
thing like  this  conclusion  is  true  even  if  one  measures  complication 
by  the  crudest  possible  standard,  the  number  of  elementary  parts. 
There  is  a  minimum  number  of  parts  below  which  complication  is 
degenerative,  in  the  sense  that  if  one  automaton  makes  another  the 
second  is  less  complex  than  the  first,  but  above  which  it  is  possible 
for  an  automaton  to  construct  other  automata  of  equal  or  higher 
complexity.  Where  this  number  lies  depends  upon  how  you  define 
the  parts.  I  think  that  with  reasonable  definitions  of  parts,  like  those 
I  will  partially  indicate  later,  which  give  one  or  two  dozen  parts  with 
simple  properties,  this  minimum  number  is  large,  in  the  millions.  I 
don't  have  a  good  estimate  of  it,  although  I  think  that  one  will  be 
produced  before  terribly  long,  but  to  do  so  will  be  laborious. 

There  is  thus  this  completely  decisive  property  of  complexity, 
that  there  exists  a  critical  size  below  which  the  process  of  synthesis 
is  degenerative,  but  above  which  the  phenomenon  of  synthesis,  if 
properly  arranged,  can  become  explosive,  in  other  words,  where 
syntheses  of  automata  can  proceed  in  such  a  manner  that  each  autom- 
aton will  produce  other  automata  which  are  more  complex  and  of 
higher  potentialities  than  itself. 

Now,  none  of  this  can  get  out  of  the  realm  of  vague  statement 
until  one  has  defined  the  concept  of  complication  correctly.  And  one 
cannot  define  the  concept  of  complication  correctly  until  one  has 
seen  in  greater  detail  some  critical  examples,  that  is,  some  of  the 
constructs  which  exhibit  the  critical  and  paradoxical  properties  of 
complication.  There  is  nothing  new  about  this.  It  was  exactly  the 
same  with  conservation  and  non-conservation  properties  in  physics, 
with  the  concepts  of  energy  and  entropy,  and  with  other  critical 
concepts.  The  simplest  mechanical  and  thermodynamic  systems  had 
to  be  discussed  for  a  long  time  before  the  correct  concepts  of  energy 
and  entropy  could  be  abstracted  from  them. 

[  Von  Neumann  only  briefly  described  the  kinds  of  elements  or 
parts  he  planned  to  use.  There  are  neurons  like  those  of  McCulloch 
and  Pitts.  There  are  elements  "that  have  absolutely  no  function 
except  that  they  are  rigid  and  produce  a  geometrical  tie  between 
their  ends.,,  Another  kind  of  element  is  called  a  "motor  organ' '  and 
a  "muscle-like  affair";  it  contracts  to  zero  length  when  stimulated. 
There  is  an  organ  which,  when  pulsed,  "can  either  make  or  break  a 
connection."  He  said  that  less  than  a  dozen  kinds  of  elements  are 
needed.  An  automaton  composed  of  these  parts  can  catch  other  parts 
which  accidentally  come  in  contact  with  it;  "it  is  possible  to  invent 
a  system  by  which  it  can  sense"  what  part  it  has  caught. 


COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA     HIERARCHY  AND   EVOLUTION  81 

In  June  of  1948  von  Neumann  gave  three  lectures  on  automata 
at  the  Institute  for  Advanced  Study  to  a  small  group  of  friends.  He 
probably  did  this  in  preparation  for  the  Hixon  Symposium  which 
took  place  in  September  of  that  year.2  These  lectures  contained  the 
most  detailed  description  of  the  parts  of  his  self -reproducing  autom- 
aton that  I  know  of.  For  this  reason,  I  have  attempted  to  recon- 
struct, from  the  notes  and  memories  of  the  audience,  what  he  said 
about  these  parts  and  how  they  would  function. 

Von  Neumann  described  eight  kinds  of  parts.  All  seem  to  have 
been  symbolized  with  straight  lines;  inputs  and  outputs  were  in- 
dicated at  the  ends  and/or  the  middle.  The  temporal  reference  frame 
was  discrete,  each  element  taking  a  unit  of  time  to  respond.  It  is  not 
clear  whether  he  intended  this  list  to  be  complete;  I  suspect  that  he 
had  not  yet  made  up  his  mind  on  this  point. 

Four  of  the  parts  perform  logical  and  information  processing  opera- 
tions. A  stimulus  organ  receives  and  transmits  stimuli;  it  receives 
them  disjunctively,  that  is,  it  realizes  the  truth-function  up  or  q." 
A  coincidence  organ  realizes  the  truth-function  up  and  q."  An  in- 
hibitory organ  realizes  the  truth-function  up  and  not-g."  A  stimuli 
producer  serves  as  a  source  of  stimuli. 

The  fifth  part  is  a  rigid  member,  from  which  a  rigid  frame  for  an 
automaton  can  be  constructed.  A  rigid  member  does  not  carry  any 
stimuli;  that  is,  it  is  an  insulated  girder.  A  rigid  member  may  be 
connected  to  other  rigid  members  as  well  as  to  parts  which  are  not 
rigid  members.  These  connections  are  made  by  a  fusing  organ  which, 
when  stimulated,  welds  or  solders  two  parts  together.  Presumably 
the  fusing  organ  is  used  in  the  following  way.  Suppose  point  a  of  one 
girder  is  to  be  joined  to  point  b  of  another  girder.  The  active  or  out- 
put end  of  the  fusing  organ  is  placed  in  contact  with  points  a  and  b. 
A  stimulus  into  the  input  end  of  the  fusing  organ  at  time  t  causes 
points  a  and  b  to  be  welded  together  at  time  t  +  1.  The  fusing  organ 
can  be  withdrawn  later.  Connections  may  be  broken  by  a  cutting 
organ  which,  when  stimulated,  unsolders  a  connection. 

The  eighth  part  is  a  muscle,  used  to  produce  motion.  A  muscle  is 
normally  rigid.  It  may  be  connected  to  other  parts.  If  stimulated  at 
time  t  it  will  contract  to  length  zero  by  time  t  +  1,  keeping  all  its 
connections.  It  will  remain  contracted  as  long  as  it  is  stimulated. 
Presumably  muscles  can  be  used  to  move  parts  and  make  connections 
in  the  following  way.  Suppose  that  muscle  1  lies  between  point  a  of 

2  [  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata.' '  Collected  Works  5.288- 
328.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the  Illinois  lectures  were  delivered  in  December  of 
1949.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


one  girder  and  point  6  of  another  girder,  and  muscle  2  lies  between 
point  a  and  the  active  end  c  of  a  fusing  organ.  When  both  muscles 
are  stimulated,  they  will  contract,  thereby  bringing  points  a,  6,  and 
c  together.  When  the  fusing  organ  is  stimulated,  it  will  weld  points 
a  and  b  together.  Finally,  when  the  stimuli  to  the  muscles  are  stopped, 
the  muscles  will  return  to  their  original  length,  at  least  one  end  of 
muscle  1  separating  from  the  point  ab.  Von  Neumann  does  not  seem 
to  have  discussed  the  question  of  how  the  connections  between  mus- 
cles and  other  parts  are  made  and  broken. 

Von  Neumann  conceived  of  an  automaton  constructing  other 
automata  in  the  following  manner.  The  constructing  automaton 
floats  on  a  surface,  surrounded  by  an  unlimited  supply  of  parts.  The 
constructing  automaton  contains  in  its  memory  a  description  of  the 
automaton  to  be  constructed.  Operating  under  the  direction  of  this 
description,  it  picks  up  the  parts  it  needs  and  assembles  them  into 
the  desired  automaton.  To  do  this,  it  must  contain  a  device  which 
catches  and  identifies  the  parts  that  come  in  contact  with  it.  The 
June,  1948  lectures  contain  only  a  few  remarks  on  how  this  device 
might  operate.  Two  stimulus  units  protrude  from  the  constructing 
automaton.  When  a  part  touches  them  tests  can  be  made  to  see  what 
kind  of  part  it  is.  For  example,  a  stimulus  organ  will  transmit  a  sig- 
nal; a  girder  will  not.  A  muscle  might  be  identified  by  determining 
that  it  contracts  when  stimulated. 

Von  Neumann  intended  to  disregard  the  fuel  and  energy  problem 
in  his  first  design  attempt.  He  planned  to  consider  it  later,  perhaps 
by  introducing  a  battery  as  an  additional  elementary  part.  Except 
for  this  addition,  von  Neumann's  early  model  of  self -reproduction 
deals  with  the  geometrical-kinematic  problems  of  movement,  contact, 
positioning,  fusing,  and  cutting,  and  ignores  the  truly  mechanical 
and  chemical  questions  of  force  and  energy.  Hence  I  call  it  his  kine- 
matic model  of  self -reproduction.  This  early  model  is  to  be  contrasted 
with  his  later  cellular  model  of  self -reproduction,  which  is  presented 
in  Part  II  of  the  present  work. 

In  his  June,  1948  lectures  von  Neumann  raised  the  question  of 
whether  kinematic  self -reproduction  requires  three  dimensions.  He 
suspected  that  either  three  dimensions  or  a  Riemann  surface  (multi- 
ply-connected plane)  would  be  needed.  We  will  see  in  Part  II  that 
only  two  dimensions  are  required  for  self -reproduction  in  von  Neu- 
mann's cellular  model.  This  is  a  strong  indication  that  two  dimensions 
are  sufficient  for  kinematic  self -reproduction. 

We  return  now  to  the  Illinois  lectures.  Von  Neumann  discussed 
the  general  design  of  a  self -reproducing  automaton.  He  said  that  it 


COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA — HIERARCHY  AND  EVOLUTION  83 

is  in  principle  possible  to  set  up  a  machine  shop  which  can  make  a 
copy  of  any  machine,  given  enough  time  and  raw  materials.  This  shop 
would  contain  a  machine  tool  B  with  the  following  powers.  Given  a 
pattern  or  object  X,  it  would  search  over  X  and  list  its  parts  and 
their  connections,  thereby  obtaining  a  description  of  X.  Using  this 
description,  the  tool  B  would  then  make  a  copy  of  X,  "This  is  quite 
close  to  self-reproduction,  because  you  can  furnish  B  with  itself."] 

But  it  is  easier,  and  for  the  ultimate  purpose  just  as  effective,  not 
to  construct  an  automaton  which  can  copy  any  pattern  or  specimen 
given  to  it,  but  to  construct  an  automaton  which  can  produce  an 
object  starting  from  a  logical  description.  In  any  conceivable  method 
ever  invented  by  man,  an  automaton  which  produces  an  object  by 
copying  a  pattern  will  go  first  from  the  pattern  to  a  description  and 
then  from  the  description  to  the  object.  It  first  abstracts  what  the 
thing  is  like,  and  then  carries  it  out.  It's  therefore  simpler  not  to 
extract  from  a  real  object  its  definition,  but  to  start  from  the  defini- 
tion. 

To  proceed  in  this  manner  one  must  have  axiomatic  descriptions 
of  automata.  You  see,  I'm  coming  quite  close  to  Turing's  trick  with 
universal  automata,  which  also  started  with  a  general  formal  descrip- 
tion of  automata.  If  you  take  those  dozen  elements  I  referred  to  in  a 
rather  vague  and  general  way  and  give  exact  descriptions  of  them 
(which  could  be  done  on  two  printed  pages  or  less),  you  will  have  a 
formal  language  for  describing  automata  unambiguously.  Now  any 
notation  can  be  expressed  as  a  binary  notation,  which  can  be  recorded 
on  a  punched  tape  with  a  single  channel.  Hence  any  automaton 
description  could  be  punched  on  a  piece  of  tape.  At  first,  it  is  better 
not  to  use  a  description  of  the  pieces  and  how  they  fit  together,  but 
rather  a  description  of  the  consecutive  steps  to  be  used  in  building 
the  automaton. 

[  Von  Neumann  then  showed  how  to  construct  a  binary  tape  out  of 
rigid  elements.  See  Figure  2.  A  binary  character  is  represented  at 
each  intersection  of  the  basic  chain;  "one"  is  represented  by  an  at- 
tached rigid  element,  "zero"  by  the  absence  of  a  side  element.  Writing 
and  erasing  are  accomplished  by  adding  and  removing  side  elements.] 

I  have  simplified  unnecessarily,  just  because  of  a  purely  mathe- 
matical habit  of  trying  to  do  things  with  a  minimum  of  notation. 
Since  I'm  using  a  binary  notation,  all  I'm  attaching  here  is  no  side 
chain,  or  a  one-step  side  chain.  Existing  languages  and  practical 
notations  use  more  symbols  than  the  binary  system.  There  is  no 
difficulty  in  using  more  symbols  here;  you  simply  attach  more  com- 
plex side  chains.  In  fact,  the  very  linearity  of  our  logical  notation  is 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


completely  unnecessary  here.  You  could  use  more  complicated  looped 
chains,  which  would  be  perfectly  good  carriers  for  a  code,  but  it  would 
not  be  a  linear  code.  There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  our  predilection 
for  linear  codes,  which  have  a  simple,  almost  temporal  sequence,  is 
chiefly  a  literary  habit,  corresponding  to  our  not  particularly  high 
level  of  combinatorial  cleverness,  and  that  a  very  efficient  language 
would  probably  depart  from  linearity.3 

There  is  no  great  difficulty  in  giving  a  complete  axiomatic  account 
of  how  to  describe  any  conceivable  automaton  in  a  binary  code.  Any 
such  description  can  then  be  represented  by  a  chain  of  rigid  elements 
like  that  of  Figure  2.  Given  any  automaton  X,  let  0(X)  designate  the 
chain  which  represents  X.  Once  you  have  done  this,  you  can  design  a 
universal  machine  tool  A  which,  when  furnished  with  such  a  chain 
0(X),  will  take  it  and  gradually  consume  it,  at  the  same  time  building 
up  the  automaton  X  from  the  parts  floating  around  freely  in  the  sur- 
rounding milieu.  All  this  design  is  laborious,  but  it  is  not  difficult  in 
principle,  for  it's  a  succession  of  steps  in  formal  logics.  It  is  not  quali- 
tatively different  from  the  type  of  argumentation  with  which  Turing 
constructed  his  universal  automaton. 

Another  thing  which  one  needs  is  this.  I  stated  earlier  that  it  might 
be  quite  complicated  to  construct  a  machine  which  will  copy  an 
automaton  that  is  given  it,  and  that  it  is  preferable  to  proceed,  not 
from  original  to  copy,  but  from  verbal  description  to  copy.  I  would 
like  to  make  one  exception;  I  would  like  to  be  able  to  copy  linear 
chains  of  rigid  elements.  Now  this  is  very  easy.  For  the  real  reason  it 
is  harder  to  copy  an  existing  automaton  than  its  description  is  that 
the  existing  automaton  does  not  conform  with  our  habit  of  linearity, 
its  parts  being  connected  with  each  other  in  all  possible  directions, 
and  it's  quite  difficult  just  to  check  off  the  pieces  that  have  already 
been  described.4  But  it's  not  difficult  to  copy  a  linear  chain  of  rigid 
elements.  So  I  will  assume  that  there  exists  an  automaton  B  which 
has  this  property:  If  you  provide  B  with  a  description  of  anything, 
it  consumes  it  and  produces  two  copies  of  this  description. 

Please  consider  that  after  I  have  described  these  two  elementary 
steps,  one  may  still  hold  the  illusion  that  I  have  not  broken  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  degeneracy  of  complication.  It  is  still  not  true  that,  start- 
ing from  something,  I  have  made  something  more  subtle  and  more 

3  [  The  programming  language  of  flow  diagrams,  invented  by  von  Neumann, 
is  a  possible  example.  See  p.  13  of  the  Introduction  to  the  present  volume.] 

4  [  Compare  Sec.  1.6.3  of  Part  II,  written  about  3  years  later.  Here  von 
Neumann  gives  a  more  fundamental  reason  for  having  the  constructing  auto- 
maton work  from  a  description  of  an  automaton  rather  than  from  the  automa- 
ton itself.] 


COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA — HIERARCHY  AND  EVOLUTION  85 

involved.  The  general  constructive  automaton  A  produces  only  X 
when  a  complete  description  of  X  is  furnished  it,  and  on  any  reason 
able  view  of  what  constitutes  complexity,  this  description  of  X  is  as 
complex  as  X  itself.  The  general  copying  automaton  B  produces  two 
copies  of  <j>(X),  but  the  juxtaposition  of  two  copies  of  the  same  thing 
is  in  no  sense  of  higher  order  than  the  thing  itself.  Furthermore,  the 
extra  unit  B  is  required  for  this  copying. 

Now  we  can  do  the  following  thing.  We  can  add  a  certain  amount 
of  control  equipment  C  to  the  automaton  A  +  B.  The  automaton  C 
dominates  both  A  and  5,  actuating  them  alternately  according  to 
the  following  pattern.  The  control  C  will  first  cause  B  to  make  two 
copies  of  <t>(X).  The  control  C  will  next  cause  A  to  construct  X  at  the 
price  of  destroying  one  copy  of  </>(X).  Finally,  the  control  C  will  tie 
X  and  the  remaining  copy  of  <f>{X)  together  and  cut  them  loose  from 
the  complex  (A  +  B  +  C).  At  the  end  the  entity  X  +  4>(X)  has  been 
produced. 

Now  choose  the  aggregate  (A  +  B  +  C)  for  X.  The  automaton 
(A  +  B  +  C)  +  4>(A  +  B  +  C)  will  produce  (A  +  B  +  C)  + 
<t>(A  +  B  +  C).  Hence  auto-reproduction  has  taken  place. 

[  The  details  are  as  follows.  We  are  given  the  universal  constructor 
(A  +  B  +  C),  to  which  is  attached  a  description  of  itself,  <f>(A  +  B  + 
C).  Thus  the  process  of  self -reproduction  starts  with  (A  +  B  +  C)  + 
<t>{A  +  B  +  C).  Control  C  directs  B  to  copy  the  description  twice; 
the  result  is  (A  +  B  +  C)  +  <t>(A  +  B  +  C)  +  <t>(A  +  B  +  C). 
Then  C  directs  A  to  produce  the  automaton  A  +  B  +  C  from  one 
copy  of  the  description;  the  result  is  (A  +  B  +  C)  +  (A  +  B  +  C)  + 
<j){A  +  B  +  C).  Finally,  C  ties  the  new  automaton  and  its  description 
together  and  cuts  them  loose.  The  final  result  consists  of  the  two 
automata  (A  +  B  +  C)  and  (A  +  B  +  C)  +  <j>(A  +  B  +  C).  If 
B  were  to  copy  the  description  thrice,  the  process  would  start  with 
one  copy  of  (A  +  B  +  C)  +  <f>(A  +  B  +  C)  and  terminate  with 
two  copies  of  this  automaton.  In  this  way,  the  universal  constructor 
reproduces  itself.] 

This  is  not  a  vicious  circle.  It  is  quite  true  that  I  argued  with  a 
variable  X  first,  describing  what  C  is  supposed  to  do,  and  then  put 
something  which  involved  C  for  X.  But  I  defined  A  and  B  exactly, 
before  I  ever  mentioned  this  particular  X,  and  I  defined  C  in  terms 
which  apply  to  any  X.  Therefore,  in  defining  A,  B,  and  (7,  I  did  not 
make  use  of  what  X  is  to  be,  and  I  am  entitled  later  on  to  use  an  X 
which  refers  explicitly  to  A,  B,  and  C.  The  process  is  not  circular. 

The  general  constructive  automaton  A  has  a  certain  creative  ability, 
the  ability  to  go  from  a  description  of  an  object  to  the  object.  Like- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


wise,  the  general  copying  automaton  B  has  the  creative  ability  to  go 
from  an  object  to  two  copies  of  it.  Neither  of  these  automata,  however, 
is  self -reproductive.  Moreover,  the  control  automaton  C  is  far  from 
having  any  kind  of  creative  or  reproductive  ability.  All  it  can  do  is  to 
stimulate  two  other  organs  so  that  they  act  in  certain  ways,  tie  cer- 
tain things  together,  and  cut  these  things  loose  from  the  original 
system.  Yet  the  combination  of  the  three  automata  A,  B,  and  C  is 
auto-reproductive.  Thus  you  may  break  a  self -reproductive  system 
into  parts  whose  functioning  is  necessary  for  the  whole  system  to  be 
self -reproductive,  but  which  are  not  themselves  self -reproductive. 

You  can  do  one  more  thing.  Let  XbeA  +  B  +  C  +  D,  where  D 
is  any  automaton.  Then  (A  +  B  +  C)  +  <j>(A  +  B  +  C  +  D)  pro- 
duces {A  +  B  +  C  +  D)  +  <t>(A  +  B  +  C  +  D).  In  other  words, 
our  constructing  automaton  is  now  of  such  a  nature  that  in  its  normal 
operation  it  produces  another  object  D  as  well  as  making  a  copy  of 
itself.  This  is  the  normal  function  of  an  auto-reproductive  organism: 
it  creates  byproducts  in  addition  to  reproducing  itself. 

The  system  (A  +  B  +  C  +  D)  can  undergo  processes  similar  to 
the  process  of  mutation.  One  of  the  difficulties  in  defining  what  one 
means  by  self -reproduction  is  that  certain  organizations,  such  as 
growing  crystals,  are  self -reproductive  by  any  naive  definition  of 
self-reproduction,  yet  nobody  is  willing  to  award  them  the  distinc- 
tion of  being  self -reproductive.  A  way  around  this  difficulty  is  to 
say  that  self -reproduction  includes  the  ability  to  undergo  inheritable 
mutations  as  well  as  the  ability  to  make  another  organism  like  the 
original. 

Consider  the  situation  with  respect  to  the  automaton  (A  +  B  + 
C  +  D)  +  <t>(A  +  B  +  C  +  D).  By  a  mutation  I  will  simply  mean  a 
random  change  of  one  element  anywhere.  If  an  element  is  changed 
at  random  in  one  of  the  automata  A,  B,  or  C,  the  system  will  usually 
not  completely  reproduce  itself.  For  example,  if  an  element  is  changed 
in  C,  C  may  fail  to  stimulate  A  and  B  at  the  proper  time,  or  it  may 
fail  to  make  the  connections  and  disconnections  which  are  required. 
Such  a  mutation  is  lethal. 

If  there  is  a  change  in  the  description  <j>(A  +  B  +  C  +  D),  the 
system  will  produce,  not  itself,  but  a  modification  of  itself.  Whether 
the  next  generation  can  produce  anything  or  not  depends  on  where 
the  change  is.  If  the  change  is  in  A,  B,  or  (7,  the  next  generation  will 
be  sterile.  If  the  change  occurs  in  Z),  the  system  with  the  mutation 
is  exactly  like  the  original  system,  except  that  D  has  been  replaced 
by  D'.  This  system  can  reproduce  itself,  but  its  by-product  will  be 


COMPLICATED  AUTOMATA — HIERARCHY  AND  EVOLUTION  87 

D'  rather  than  D.  This  is  the  normal  pattern  of  an  inheritable  muta- 
tion. 

So,  while  this  system  is  exceedingly  primitive,  it  has  the  trait  of  an 
inheritable  mutation,  even  to  the  point  that  a  mutation  made  at 
random  is  most  probably  lethal,  but  may  be  non-lethal  and  inherita- 
ble. 


PART 


Two 


The  Theory  of  Automata: 
Construction,  Reproduction, 
Homogeneity 


EDITORIAL  NOTE 


[The  editor's  insertions,  commentaries,  explanations,  sum- 
maries, and  Chapter  5  are  in  brackets.  The  figures  are  at  the  end  of 
the  volume. 

The  reader  who  wishes  a  general  view  of  the  contents  of  this 
part  should  examine  Sections  1.1.2.3,  1.3.3.5,  2.8.2,  2.8.3,  4.1.1,  4.3.1, 
and  5.3.] 


Chapter  1 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


1.1  Introduction 

1.1.1  J  The  theory  of  automata.  The  formalistic  study  of  automata 
is  a  subject  lying  in  the  intermediate  area  between  logics,  communica- 
tion theory,  and  physiology.  It  implies  abstractions  that  make  it  an 
imperfect  entity  when  viewed  exclusively  from  the  point  of  view  of 
any  one  of  the  three  above  disciplines — the  imperfection  being  prob- 
ably worst  in  the  last  mentioned  instance.  Nevertheless  an  assimila- 
tion of  certain  viewpoints  from  each  one  of  these  three  disciplines 
seems  to  be  necessary  for  a  proper  approach  to  that  theory.  Hence 
it  will  have  to  be  viewed  synoptically,  from  the  combined  point  of 
view  of  all  three,  and  will  probably,  in  the  end,  be  best  regarded  as  a 
separate  discipline  in  its  own  right.1 

1.1.1.2  The  constructive  method  and  its  limitations.  The  present 
paper  deals  with  a  particular  and  limited  phase  of  the  formalistic 
theory  of  automata.  The  decisive  limitation  is  that  we  will  establish 
certain  existence  theorems,  without,  however,  being  able  to  prove 
that  the  constructions  on  which  they  are  based  are  in  any  sense  op- 
tima^ or  that  the  postulates  that  they  use  are  in  any  sense  minimal. 
These  questions  of  optimality  and  minimality  could  presumably  be 
treated  only  if  the  methods  for  the  formation  of  invariant  quantitative 
concepts,  and  for  their  measurement,  their  evaluation,  and  the  like, 
had  been  much  further  evolved  in  this  subject  of  automata,  control, 
and  organization,  than  they  are  at  present.  We  believe  that  such  a 
development  is  possible  and  to  be  expected,  and  that  it  will  to  an 
important  extent  follow  the  patterns  and  the  concept  formations  of 
thermodynamics.2  The  methods  that  will  be  used  in  this  paper  con- 

1  [Von  Neumann  here  referred  to  Wiener.  See  Wiener's  Cybernetics  and  von 
Neumann's  review  of  it.] 

2  Von  Neumann,  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata"  and 
'  'Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from  Unreliable 
Components."  [See  also  the  Third  and  Fourth  Lectures  of  Part  I  of  the  present 
volume.] 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


tribute,  however,  only  very  partially  to  the  effort  that  is  needed  in 
that  direction,  and,  at  any  rate,  we  will  limit  ourselves  at  this  occasion 
to  the  establishing  of  certain  existences  (by  suitable,  ad  hoc  construc- 
tions) in  the  sense  outlined  above. 

1.1.2.1  The  main  questions:  (A)-(E).  Within  the  above  limitations, 
however,  we  will  deal  with  problems  that  are  rather  central — at  least 
for  the  initial  phases  of  the  subject.  We  will  investigate  automata 
under  two  important,  and  connected,  aspects:  those  of  logics  and  of 
construction.  We  can  organize  our  considerations  under  the  headings 
of  five  main  questions : 

(A)  Logical  universality.  When  is  a  class  of  automata  logically 
universal,  i.e.,  able  to  perform  all  those  logical  operations  that  are 
at  all  performable  with  finite  (but  arbitrarily  extensive)  means? 
Also,  with  what  additional — variable,  but  in  the  essential  respects 
standard — attachments  is  a  single  automaton  logically  universal? 

(B)  Construe tibility.  Can  an  automaton  be  constructed,  i.e.,  as- 
sembled and  built  from  appropriately  defined  "raw  materials/'  by 
another  automaton?  Or,  starting  from  the  other  end  and  extending 
the  question,  what  class  of  automata  can  be  constructed  by  one, 
suitably  given,  automaton?  The  variable,  but  essentially  standard, 
attachments  to  the  latter,  in  the  sense  of  the  second  question  of  (A), 
may  here  be  permitted. 

(C)  Construction-universality.  Making  the  second  question  of  (B) 
more  specific,  can  any  one,  suitably  given,  automaton  be  construction- 
universal,  i.e.,  be  able  to  construct  in  the  sense  of  question  (B)  (with 
suitable,  but  essentially  standard,  attachments)  every  other  auto- 
maton? 

(D)  Self -reproduction.  Narrowing  question  (C),  can  any  auto- 
maton construct  other  automata  that  are  exactly  like  it?  Can  it  be 
made,  in  addition,  to  perform  further  tasks,  e.g.,  also  construct  cer- 
tain other,  prescribed  automata? 

(E)  Evolution.  Combining  questions  (C)  and  (D),  can  the  con- 
struction of  automata  by  automata  progress  from  simpler  types  to 
increasingly  complicated  types?  Also,  assuming  some  suitable  defini- 
tion of  "efficiency,"  can  this  evolution  go  from  less  efficient  to  more 
efficient  automata? 

1.1.2.2  The  nature  of  the  answers  to  be  obtained.  The  answer  to 
question  (A)  is  known.3  We  will  establish  affirmative  answers  to 

3  Turing,  "On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an  Application  to  the  Entschei- 
dungsproblem."  [See  the  discussion  of  Turing  machines  and  universal  Turing 
machines  at  p.  49  ff .  above.  The  indefinitely  extendible  tape  of  a  Turing  ma- 
chine is  the  ' 'variable,  but  essentially  standard,  attachment"  von  Neumann 
referred  to  in  questions  (A)  and  (B)  above.] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




questions  (B)-(D)  as  well.4  An  important  limitation  to  the  relevance 
of  a  similar  answer  to  question  (E)  lies  in  the  need  for  a  more  unam- 
biguous formulation  of  the  question,  particularly  of  the  meaning  of 
"efficiency."  In  addition,  we  will  be  able  to  treat  questions  (A)-(E) 
in  this  sense  with  much  more  rigid  determinations  as  to  what  consti- 
tutes an  automaton,  namely  with  the  imposition  of  what  is  best  de- 
scribed as  a  crystalline  regularity.  In  fact,  this  further  result  would 
seem  to  be  at  least  as  essential  and  instructive  as  the  ability  to  answer 
questions  (A)-(D)  {and,  to  some  extent  question  (E);  cf.  above} 
affirmatively. 

In  the  balance  of  Chapter  1  we  carry  out  a  heuristic  and  preliminary 
discussion  of  questions  (A)-(E).  In  Chapter  2  we  develop  a  specific 
model,  within  the  terms  of  which  we  can  and  will  deal  in  full  detail 
and  rigorously  with  questions  (A)-(D).  Chapter  3  contains  the  analy- 
sis of  another  more  natural,  but  technically  more  refractory,  model. 
Chapter  4  is  devoted  to  further  heuristic  considerations,  which  are 
more  conveniently  made  after  (and  to  some  extent  presuppose)  the 
detailed  constructions  of  Chapters  2  and  3. 

[  1.1.2.3  Von  Neumann's  models  of  self -reproduction.  The  preceding 
paragraph  gives  the  plan  von  Neumann  had  in  mind  when  he  wrote 
the  present  chapter.  Unfortunately,  von  Neumann  was  only  able  to 
carry  out  his  intention  through  part  of  the  planned  Chapter  2.  To 
understand  the  plan,  and  the  several  references  he  makes  to  it  in  the 
balance  of  the  present  chapter,  one  must  know  something  about  the 
various  models  of  self -reproduction  he  considered.  We  will  describe 
these  models  briefly  in  the  present  subsection.  Of  necessity,  much  of 
what  we  say  here  is  based  on  personal  communications  from  people 
with  whom  von  Neumann  discussed  his  models  of  self-reproduction. 

Altogether,  von  Neumann  considered  five  models  of  self-reproduc- 
tion. We  will  call  these  the  kinematic  model,  the  cellular  model,  the 
excitation-threshold-fatigue  model,  the  continuous  model,  and  the 
probabilistic  model. 

The  kinematic  model  deals  with  the  geometric -kinematic  problems 
of  movement,  contact,  positioning,  fusing,  and  cutting,  but  ignores 
problems  of  force  and  energy.  The  primitive  elements  of  the  kinematic 
model  are  of  the  following  kinds :  logical  (switch)  and  memory  (delay) 
elements,  which  store  and  process  information;  girders,  which  provide 
structural  rigidity;  sensing  elements,  which  sense  objects  in  the  en- 
vironment; kinematic  (muscle-like)  elements,  which  move  objects 
around;  and  joining  (welding)  and  cutting  elements,  which  connect 

4  Von  Neumann,  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata,"  Collected 
Works  5.315-318. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


and  disconnect  elements.  The  kinematic  model  of  self -reproduction 
is  described  in  the  Fifth  Lecture  of  Part  I  of  the  present  work.  As 
indicated  there,  von  Neumann  was  thinking  about  it  at  least  by  1948. 

Von  Neumann's  second  model  of  self -reproduction  is  his  cellular 
model.  It  was  stimulated  by  S.  M.  Ulam,  who  suggested  during  a  dis- 
cussion of  the  kinematic  model  that  a  cellular  framework  would  be 
more  amenable  to  logical  and  mathematical  treatment  than  the  frame- 
work of  the  kinematic  model.5  In  the  cellular  model,  self -reproduction 
takes  place  in  an  indefinitely  large  space  which  is  divided  into  cells, 
each  cell  containing  the  same  finite  automaton.  Von  Neumann  spoke 
of  this  space  as  a  "crystalline  regularity, "  a  "crystalline  medium/'  a 
"granular  structure, "  and  as  a  "cellular  structure. "  6  We  will  use  the 
term  cellular  structure. 

There  are  many  possible  forms  of  cellular  structure  which  may  be 
used  for  self-reproduction.  Von  Neumann  chose,  for  detailed  develop- 
ment, an  infinite  array  of  square  cells.  Each  cell  contains  the  same 
29 -state  finite  automaton.  Each  cell  communicates  directly  with  its 
four  contiguous  neighbors  with  a  delay  of  at  least.  1  unit  of  time.  Von 
Neumann  developed  this  model  in  a  manuscript  entitled  "Theory  of 
Automata:  Construction,  Reproduction,  Homogeneity/ '  which  con- 
stitutes the  present  Part  II  of  the  present  volume.  In  a  letter  to  me, 
Mrs.  Klara  von  Neumann  said  of  her  husband's  manuscript:  "I  am 
quite  positive  that  it  was  started  by  him  in  late  September  1952  and 
that  he  continued  working  on  it  until  sometime  in  mid  late  1953." 
As  far  as  I  can  tell,  von  Neumann  did  little  or  nothing  with  the  manu- 
script after  1953. 

The  manuscript  as  left  by  von  Neumann  had  two  completed  chap- 
ters and  a  long  but  incomplete  third  chapter.  Chapter  1  of  the  manu- 
script is  the  present  chapter.  Chapter  2  of  the  manuscript  states  the 
transition  rule  governing  the  29-state  cellular  system;  this  is  Chapter 
2  below.  The  incomplete  Chapter  3  of  the  manuscript  carries  out  the 
fundamental  steps  in  the  design  of  a  cellular  self -reproducing  auto- 
maton; it  appears  below  as  Chapters  3  and  4.  Von  Neumann  never 
completed  the  design  of  his  cellular  self -reproducing  automaton;  I 
indicate  how  to  do  this  in  Chapter  5  below. 

Von  Neumann's  cellular  model  of  self -reproduction  should  be  com- 
pared with  some  work  of  Ulam  on  cellular  automata.  In  his  A  Collec- 

6  [See  footnote  17  of  Sec.  1.3.1.2  below.  In  his  "Random  Processes  and  Trans- 
formations," presented  in  1950,  Ulam  described  a  cellular  framework  briefly 
and  stated  that  it  had  been  considered  by  von  Neumann  and  him.] 

6  [Moore,  "Machine  Models  of  Self -Reproduction,"  suggested  the  name 
"tessellation  model."] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




tion  of  Mathematical  Problems,  Ulam  formulated  a  matrix  problem 
arising  out  of  the  cellular  model.  In  his  "On  Some  Mathematical 
Problems  Connected  with  Patterns  of  Growth  of  Figures"  and  "Elec- 
tronic Computers  and  Scientific  Research, "  Ulam  studied  the  growth 
of  figures  in  cellular  automata  with  simple  transition  rules.  He  also  \_y 
studied  the  evolution  of  successive  generations  of  individuals  with 
simple  properties,  each  generation  producing  its  successor  in  accord- 
ance with  a  simple,  but  non-linear  recursive  transformation. 

Under  a  covering  letter  dated  October  28,  1952,  von  Neumann  sent 
a  copy  of  the  present  Chapter  1  to  H.  H.  Goldstine.  This  letter  elabo- 
rates the  plan  of  Section  1.1.2.2  above. 

This  is  the  introduction — or  " Chapter  1" — that  I  promised  you.  It  is 
tentative  and  incomplete  in  the  following  respects  particularly: 

(1)  It  is  mainly  an  introduction  for  "Chapter  2"  which  will  deal  with  a 
model  where  every  cell  has  about  30  states.  It  refers  only  very  incompletely 
to  "Chapter  3"  in  which  a  model  with  excitation-threshold-fatigue  mecha- 
nisms alone  will  be  discussed,  and  to  "Chapter  4"  where  I  hope  to  say  some- 
thing about  a  "continuous"  rather  than  "crystalline"  model.  There,  as  far 
as  I  can  now  see,  a  system  of  non-linear  partial  differential  equations,  essen- 
tially of  the  diffusion  type,  will  be  used. 

(2)  The  write-up  is  still  in  a  quite  "unliterary"  form,  i.e.,  there  are  no 
footnotes  (only  their  places  are  indicated),  references,  explanations  of  the 
motivation,  origin  of  the  ideas,  etc. 

It  is  clear  that  when  von  Neumann  wrote  the  present  Chapter  1  he 
had  the  following  plan  in  mind.  Chapter  2  was  to  contain  a  complete 
development  of  the  cellular  model  of  self -reproduction.  Chapter  3 
was  to  treat  an  excitation-threshold-fatigue  model  of  self-reproduc- 
tion. Finally,  Chapter  4  was  to  discuss  a  continuous  model  of  self- 
reproduction.  Von  Neumann  finished  the  essential  steps  in  the  design 
of  the  cellular  model  and  then  stopped.  Unfortunately,  he  never  found 
time  to  finish  the  cellular  model  or  write  about  the  other  two  models. 

Von  Neumann  delivered  the  Vanuxem  Lectures  at  Princeton 
University  on  March  2  through  5,  1953.  There  were  four  lectures, 
entitled  "Machines  and  Organisms. "  The  fourth  was  devoted  to  self- 
reproduction;  the  kinematic  model,  the  cellular  model,  the  excitation- 
threshold-fatigue  model,  and  the  continuous  model  were  all  men- 
tioned. Since  he  had  already  agreed  to  give  the  manuscript  "Theory 
of  Automata:  Construction,  Reproduction,  Homogeneity"  to  the 
University  of  Illinois  Press,  von  Neumann  did  not  himself  want  to 
write  up  these  lectures  separately.  Instead,  it  was  arranged  that  John 
Kemeny  should  write  an  article  based  on  these  lectures  and  the  first 
two  chapters  of  the  manuscript.  This  was  published  in  1955  under 
the  title  "Man  Viewed  as  a  Machine."  Much  of  the  material  of  the 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


first  three  Vanuxem  Lectures  appeared  later  in  The  Computer  and 
the  Brain. 

The  excitation-threshold-fatigue  model?  of  self -reproduction  was  to 
be  based  on  the  cellular  model.  Each  cell  of  the  infinite  structure  of  the 
cellular  model  contains  a  29-state  automaton.  Von  Neumann's  idea 
was  to  construct  this  29-state  automaton  out  of  a  neuron-like  element 
which  had  a  fatigue  mechanism  as  well  as  a  threshold.  Since  fatigue 
plays  an  important  role  in  the  operation  of  neurons,  an  excitation- \/ 
threshold-fatigue  model  would  be  closer  to  actual  systems  than  the 
cellular  model.  Von  Neumann  never  discussed  how  an  idealized  neuron 
with  fatigue  would  work,  but  we  can  design  one  by  combining  what 
he  said  about  idealized  neurons  without  fatigue  with  his  account  of 
the  absolute  and  relative  refractory  periods  of  an  actual  neuron  (cf. 
pp.  44-48  above  and  Collected  Works  5.375-376). 
a„  An  idealized  excitation-threshold-fatigue  neuron  has  a  designated 
threshold  and  a  designated  refractory  period.  The  refractory  period  is 
divided  into  two  parts,  an  absolute  refractory  period  and  a  relative 
refractory  period.  If  a  neuron  is  not  fatigued,  it  becomes  excited  when- 
ever the  number  of  active  inputs  equals  or  exceeds  its  threshold.  When 
the  neuron  becomes  excited  two  things  happen:  it  emits  an  output 
signal  after  a  specified  delay,  and  the  refractory  period  begins.  The 
neuron  cannot  be  excited  at  all  during  the  absolute  refractory  period; 
it  can  be  excited  during  the  relative  refractory  period,  but  only  if  the 
number  of  active  inputs  equals  or  exceeds  a  threshold  which  is  higher 
than  the  normal  threshold. 

When  an  excitation-threshold-fatigue  neuron  becomes  excited,  it 
must  remember  this  fact  for  the  length  of  the  refractory  period  and 
use  this  information  to  prevent  input  stimuli  from  having  their  normal 
effect  on  itself.  Hence  this  kind  of  neuron  combines  switching,  delay 
of  output,  and  an  internal  memory  with  feedback  to  control  the  effect 
of  incoming  signals.  Such  a  device  is,  in  fact,  a  small  finite  automaton, 
that  is,  a  device  with  inputs  and  outputs  and  a  finite  number  of  inter- 
nal states.  In  the  fourth  Vanuxem  Lecture  von  Neumann  suggested 
that  a  neuron  with  threshold  2  and  fatigue  period  6  might  supply  most 
of  the  states  of  the  29-state  finite  automaton  needed  in  each  cell  of 
his  cellular  framework. 

7  [It  should  be  noted  that  the  phenomenon  that  von  Neumann  calls  fatigue 
is  more  often  called  refractoriness.  In  this  more  common  usage,  fatigue  is  a 
phenomenon  involving  many  refractory  periods.  The  absolute  refractory  period 
of  a  neuron  determines  a  maximum  rate  at  which  it  can  be  fired.  Repeated  firing 
of  a  neuron  at,  or  close  to,  this  rate  produces  an  increase  in  threshold,  making  it 
more  difficult  to  fire  the  neuron.  This  increase  in  threshold  is  the  phenomenon 
commonly  called  "fatigue."] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




The  fourth  model  of  self -reproduction  which  von  Neumann  con- 
sidered was  a  continuous  model.  He  planned  to  base  this  on  a  system 
of  non-linear  partial  differential  equations  of  the  type  which  govern 
diffusion  processes  in  a  fluid.  Von  Neumann  had  worked  on  non- 
linear partial  differential  equations,  and  wanted  to  use  automata 
heuristically  to  solve  theoretical  problems  about  such  equations  (cf. 
pp.  33-35  above).  In  the  case  of  the  continuous  model  of  self -reproduc- 
tion, he  planned  to  proceed  in  the  reverse  direction,  using  non-linear 
partial  differential  equations  to  solve  a  problem  of  automata  theory: 
the  logical  and  mathematical  nature  of  the  process  of  self-reproduc- 
tion. This  was  part  of  von  Neumann's  general  plan  to  employ  the 
techniques  and  results  of  that  branch  of  mathematics  known  as 

y  analysis  to  solve  problems  in  automata  theory  (cf.  pp.  25-28  above). 
The  physics,  chemistry,  biology,  and  logic  of  a  self -reproducing 
system  are  very  complex,  involving  a  large  number  of  factors;  for 
example,  mass,  entropy,  kinetic  energy,  reaction  rates,  concentration 
of  enzymes  and  hormones,  transport  processes,  coding,  and  control. 
All  the  essential  properties  of  the  self -reproducing  system  must  be 
represented  in  the  equations  by  functions  or  dependent  variables. 
Von  Neumann  recognized  that  a  system  of  simultaneous  non-linear 
partial  differential  equations  adequate  to  account  for  self -reproduction 
would  be  much  more  complex  than  the  systems  usually  studied. 

Von  Neumann  had  been  trained  as  a  chemical  engineer  and  was 
therefore  familiar  with  complex  chemical  reactions.  He  had  also 
applied  mathematics  to  complex  physical  systems  of  various  kinds. 
He  probably  thought  of  the  differential  equations  of  self -reproduction 
in  connection  with  his  proposed  excitation-threshold-fatigue  model 
of  self -reproduction.  Assume  that  the  cellular  model  is  reduced  to  the 
excitation-threshold-fatigue  model.  The  task  then  becomes  that  of 
formulating  the  differential  equations  governing  the  excitation, 
threshold,  and  fatigue  properties  of  a  neuron.  The  following  processes 
are  involved  in  neural  activity.8  The  neuron  is  stimulated  by  inputs  1 
from  other  neurons.  When  the  aggregate  of  these  inputs  reaches  the 
threshold  of  the  neuron,  it  excites  the  neuron  by  triggering  a  flow  of 
sodium  ions  from  the  outside  to  the  inside  of  the  cell  body.  The  flow 
or  diffusion  of  ions  causes  the  cell  body  to  become  depolarized.  This 
diffusion  and  depolarization  is  then  transmitted  down  the  axon  and 
constitutes  the  firing  of  the  neuron.  The  firing  is  followed  by  a  diffu- 

y  sion  of  potassium  ions  from  the  inside  of  the  neuron  to  the  outside, 

8  [For  a  complete  description  see  Eccles,  The  Neurophysiological  Basis  of 
Mind.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


which  repolarizes  the  neuron.  The  chemical  balance  of  sodium  and 
potassium  is  restored  still  later. 

It  is  clear  from  the  preceding  description  of  the  excitation,  thresh- 
old, and  fatigue  processes  of  the  neuron  that  chemical  diffusion  plays 
a  fundamental  role  in  these  processes.  This  explains  why  von  Neu- 
mann chose  partial  differential  equations  of  the  diffusion  type  for  his 
continuous  model  of  self -reproduction.  The  reason  for  von  Neumann's 
choice  of  non-linear,  rather  than  linear,  differential  equations  is  also 
k  clear.  The  kinematic,  cellular,  and  excitation-threshold-fatigue  models 
all  show  that  switching  operations  (e.g.,  threshold,  negation)  as  well 
as  control  loops  involving  branching,  feedback,  and  delay,  are  essen- 
tial to  the  logical,  informational,  and  organizational  aspects  of  self- 
reproduction.  To  model  these  discrete  phenomena  in  a  continuous 
system  it  is  necessary  to  use  non-linear  partial  differential  equations. 

The  preceding  plan  for  constructing  the  continuous  model  starts 
with  a  discrete  system  and  proceeds  to  a  continuous  system.  The 
cellular  model  of  self -reproduction  is  developed  first,  it  is  then  reduced 
to  the  excitation-threshold-fatigue  model,  and  finally,  this  model  is 
described  by  non-linear  partial  differential  equations.  The  reverse 
procedure  is  often  followed  in  science,  and  von  Neumann  was,  of 
course,  familiar  with  it.  One  takes  a  continuous  system,  such  as  a 
fluid  with  shock  waves  in  it,  and  approximates  this  system  by  dividing 
it  up  into  discrete  cells,  treating  everything  in  a  cell  as  if  it  were  in  the 
same  state.  In  this  way,  the  differential  equations  of  the  continuous 
system  are  replaced  by  the  difference  equations  of  the  discrete  system. 
One  may  then  solve  the  difference  equations  on  a  digital  computer, 
and  under  appropriate  conditions  the  solution  will  approximate  the 
solution  of  the  differential  equations. 

But  whatever  the  order  of  inquiry,  a  system  of  differential  equa- 
tions and  the  corresponding  difference  equations  represents  essentially 
the  same  phenomena.  The  transition  rule  for  the  cellular  model  (Ch. 
2  below)  is  the  difference  equation  version  of  the  system  of  partial 
differential  equations  of  the  continuous  model.  The  design  of  the  pri- 
mary automaton  which  reproduces  itself  corresponds  to  the  boundary 
conditions  on  these  partial  differential  equations.  Another  way  to  view 
the  contrast  between  the  continuous  and  cellular  models  is  in  terms 
of  the  difference  between  an  analog  and  a  digital  computer.  An  analog 
J  computer  is  a  continuous  system,  and  a  digital  computer  is  a  discrete 
system.  Thus  von  Neumann's  continuous  model  of  self -reproduction 
stands  in  the  same  relation  to  analog  computers  as  his  cellular  model 
of  self -reproduction  stands  to  digital  computers.  In  Section  12  of  his 
"Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




Unreliable  Components,"  he  proposed  a  scheme  for  representing  and 
processing  digital  information  in  an  analog  device.  His  continuous 
model  of  self -reproduction  should  be  compared  with  this  scheme. 

Von  Neumann's  continuous  model  of  self -reproduction  should  also 
be  compared  with  some  work  of  Turing.  In  "The  Chemical  Basis  of 
Morphogenesis,' '  Turing  analyzed  morphogenesis  by  solving  differ- 
ential equations  which  describe  the  interaction,  generation,  and 
diffusion  of  chemical  substances.  Turing  confined  himself  almost 
entirely  to  linear  differential  equations,  but  he  touched  on  non-linear 
differential  equations. 

Von  Neumann  had  been  interested  in  the  applications  of  probability 
theory  throughout  his  career;  his  work  on  the  foundations  of  quantum 
mechanics  and  his  theory  of  games  are  examples.  When  he  became 
interested  in  automata,  it  was  natural  for  him  to  apply  probability 
theory  here  also.  The  Third  Lecture  of  Part  I  of  the  present  work  is 
devoted  to  this  subject.  His  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis 
of  Reliable  Organisms  from  Unreliable  Components"  is  the  first  work 
on  probabilistic  automata,  that  is,  automata  in  which  the  transitions 
between  states  are  probabilistic  rather  than  deterministic.  Whenever 
he  discussed  self -reproduction,  he  mentioned  mutations,  which  are 
random  changes  of  elements  (cf.  p.  86  above  and  Sec.  1.7.4.2  below). 
In  Section  1.1.2.1  above  and  Section  1.8  below  he  posed  the  problems 
of  modeling  evolutionary  processes  in  the  framework  of  automata 
theory,  of  quantizing  natural  selection,  and  of  explaining  how  highly 
efficient,  complex,  powerful  automata  can  evolve  from  inefficient, 
simple,  weak  automata.  A  complete  solution  to  these  problems  would 
give  us  a  probabilistic  model  of  self -reproduction  and  evolution.9] 

1.2  The  Role  of  Logics — Question  (A) 

1.2.1  The  logical  operations — neurons.  In  evaluating  question  (A), 
one  must  obviously  consider  automata  which  possess  organs  that  can 
express  the  essential  propositions  of  logics  and  which  need  not  possess 
any  other  organs.  This  can  be  done  by  using  organs  each  of  which 
possesses  two  stable  states,  corresponding  to  the  basic  truth  values 
of  true  and  false  in  logics.  It  is  convenient  to  use  a  plausible  physiologi- 
cal analogy  and  to  designate  these  organs  (whatever  they  are  or  are 
thought  to  be  in  reality)  as  neurons,  and  the  two  above  states  as 
excited  and  quiescent,  respectively.  It  is  also  convenient  to  attach  to 
these  states  digital  (arithmetical)  symbols,  namely  1  and  0,  respec- 

9  [For  some  related  work,  see  J.  H.  Holland,  "Outline  for  a  Logical  Theory  of 
Adaptive  Systems, "  and  "Concerning  Efficient  Adaptive  Systems."] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


tively.10  The  familiar  structure  of  logics  can  then  be  conveyed  to  an 
automaton  built  from  such  organs  by  connecting  them  with  lines 
representing  the  logical  implications,  and  by  introducing  a  separate 
species  of  basic  organs,  i.e.,  of  neurons,  for  each  basic  logical  opera- 
tion.11 In  the  usual  propositional  calculus  these  are  and,  or,  and  not, 
to  be  designated  by  •,  +,  and  — ,  respectively.12  The  lines  which 
control  the  neuron's  behavior,  i.e.,  which  represent  the  logical  varia- 
bles that  enter  into  the  basic  logical  operation  or  function  to  which 
the  neuron  corresponds,  are  its  inputs;  the  lines  through  which  this 
neuron  expresses  its  resulting  behavior,  i.e.,  which  represent  the  value 
of  the  logical  function  in  question,  are  the  outputs.  These  are  usually 
the  inputs  of  other  neurons.  Instead  of  attributing  to  a  neuron  several 
outputs,  it  is  preferable  to  allow  only  one,  and  to  split  it  afterwards 
into  as  many  branches  as  necessary.  The  time-element  in  the  func- 
tioning of  a  neuron  is  best  expressed  by  stipulating  that  the  state 
prescribed  by  the  logical  function  corresponding  to  the  neuron  (i.e., 
the  value  of  that  function)  is  assumed  a  fixed  delay  time  r  after  the 
neurons  that  control  this  behavior  have  assumed  their  relevant  states. 
That  is,  the  response  of  a  neuron  (on  its  output  line)  occurs  a  fixed 
delay  time  r  after  the  stimuli  (on  its  input  lines).  It  is  unnecessary  to 
allow  propagation  delays  along  lines;  i.e.,  an  output  may  be  instan- 
taneously active  wherever  it  is  an  input.  It  is  simplest  to  assume  that 
all  relevant  events  take  place  at  times  t  that  are  integer  multiples 
of  r:  t  =  ut,  n  =  0,  zfcl,  ±2,  •  •  •  .  Next,  r  may  be  chosen  as  the  unit 
of  time:  r  =  1,  and  so  always  t  =  0,  zbl,  ±2,  •  •  •  . 

The  basic  neurons  referred  to  above  are  shown  in  Figure  3.  Their 
behavior  is  described  by  the  following  rules: 
1.     a,  b  are  the  input  lines;  c  is  the  output  line  of  this  neuron. 

2.1.  The  +  neuron  is  excited  at  time  t  if  and  only  if  either  the  neuron 
with  output  line  a  or  the  neuron  with  output  line  b  is  excited  at 
time  t  —  1. 

2.2.  The  •  neuron  is  excited  at  time  t  if  and  only  if  both  the  neuron 
with  output  line  a  and  the  neuron  with  output  line  6  are  excited 
at  time  t  —  1. 

2.3.  The  —  neuron  ["minus  neuron"]  is  excited  at  time  t  if  and  only 
if  the  neuron  with  output  line  a  is  not  excited  (i.e.,  is  quiescent) 
at  time  t  —  1. 

10  Boolean  algebra  is  then  applicable. 

11  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  "A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent  in 
Nervous  Activity." 

12  Von  Neumann,  ' 'Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Or- 
ganisms from  Unreliable  Components,"  Sec.  4. 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




The  time  delay  caused  by  the  operation  of  each  neuron  guarantees 
the  effective  and  constructive  character  of  the  logical  system  arrived 
at  in  this  manner.13  It  is  easily  seen — in  fact  it  is  essentially  inherent 
in  the  correspondence  between  the  species  of  neurons  introduced  and 
the  basic  operations  of  logics  (cf .  above  and  Fig.  3) — that  automata 
built  from  these  organs  can  express  all  propositional  functions  in 
logics.14  Beyond  this,  the  inclusion  of  inductive  processes,  and  more 
generally,  of  all  processes  that  are  permissible  in  finitistic  logics,  re- 
quires a  deeper  analysis.15  It  brings  in  one  substantively  new  element: 
the  need  for  an  arbitrarily  large  (finite,  but  freely  adjustable  in  size) 
memory.  This  ties  in  with  question  (B)  and  will  be  considered  sub- 
sequently. 

1.2.2  Neural  vs.  muscular  functions.  Question  (A)  involved  merely 
logical  determinations;  therefore  it  required  only  (at  least  directly 
only;  cf.,  however,  the  last  remark  in  Sec.  1.2.1)  organs  with  two 
states,  true  and  false.  These  two  states  are  adequately  covered  by  the 
neural  states  of  excitation  and  quiescence.  Question  (B),  on  the  other 
hand,  calls  for  the  construction  of  automata  by  automata,  and  it 
necessitates  therefore  the  introduction  of  organs  with  other  than 
logical  functions,  namely  with  the  kinematical  or  mechanical  attri- 
butes that  are  necessary  for  the  acquisition  and  combination  of  the 
organs  that  are  to  make  up  the  automata  under  construction.  To  use 
a  physiological  simile,  to  the  purely  neural  functions  must  be  added 
at  least  the  muscular  functions. 

At  this  point  several  alternatives  open  up. 

1.3  The  Basic  Problems  of  Construction — Question  (B) 

1 .3.1 .1  The  immediate  treatment,  involving  geometry,  kinematics,  etc. 
The  most  immediate  approach  is  this.  The  constituent  organs  are  the 
neurons  and  lines  necessitated  by  (A),  plus  such  additional  organs  as 
(B)  (i.e.,  the  present  discussion)  will  require.  These  constituent  organs 
are  to  be  conceived  of  as  physical  objects  in  actual  space.  Their  acqui- 
sition and  combination  (including  the  establishing  of  rigid  connections 
between  them)  must  accordingly  take  place  in  actual  space,  i.e., 
3-dimensional,  Euclidean  space.  (Further  variations  on  the  dimen- 
sionality and  geometrical  character  of  the  space  are  possible,  but  we 

13  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  op.  cit.  Von  Neumann,  op.  cit.,  Sees.  2.1  and  3.3. 

14  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  op.  cit.  Von  Neumann,  op.  cit.,  Sec.  3. 

15  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  op.  cit.  Von  Neumann,  op.  cit.,  Sees.  3.3  and  5.1. 
[Von  Neumann  also  mentioned  Kleene.  He  probably  intended  to  refer  to  the 
Rand  Corporation  version  of  "Representation  of  Events  in  Nerve  Nets  and 
Finite  Automata."] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


will  not  consider  them  at  this  point.  Cf.,  however,  the  crystal-lattice 
discussions  later  on.)  The  constituent  organs  that  are  needed  for  the 
automaton  construction  must  thus  be  found  and  acquired  in  space, 
they  must  be  moved  and  brought  into  contact  and  fastened  together 
in  space,  and  all  automata  must  be  planned  as  true  geometrical  (and 
kinematical  and  mechanical)  entities.  The  functions  that  were  de- 
scribed above,  rather  symbolically,  as  muscular,  will  now  be  very 
nearly  truly  muscular,  etc.  Different  degrees  of  abstraction  are  still 
possible;  for  example,  one  may  or  may  not  pay  attention  to  the  truly 
mechanical  aspects  of  the  matter  (the  forces  involved,  the  energy 
absorbed  or  dissipated,  etc.).  But  even  the  simplest  approach,  which 
disregards  the  above-mentioned  properly  mechanical  aspects  entirely 
requires  quite  complicated  geometrical-kinematical  considerations.16 
Yet,  one  cannot  help  feeling  that  these  should  be  avoided  in  a  first 
attempt  like  the  present  one:  in  this  situation  one  ought  to  be  able 
to  concentrate  all  attention  on  the  intrinsic,  logical-combinatorial 
aspects  of  the  study  of  automata.  The  use  of  the  adjective  formalistic 
at  the  beginning  of  Section  1.1.1.1  was  intended  to  indicate  such  an 
approach — with,  as  far  as  feasible,  an  avoidance  of  the  truly  geomet- 
rical, kinematical,  or  mechanical  complications.  The  propriety  of  this 
desideratum  becomes  even  clearer  if  one  continues  the  above  list  of 
avoidances,  which  progressed  from  geometry,  to  kinematics,  to  me- 
chanics. Indeed,  it  can  be  continued  (in  the  same  spirit)  to  physics, 
to  chemistry,  and  finally  to  the  analysis  of  the  specific  physiological, 
physico-chemical  structures.  All  these  should  come  in  later,  succes- 
sively, and  about  in  the  above  order;  but  a  first  investigation  might 
best  avoid  them  all,  even  geometry  and  kinematics.  (A  certain  amount 
of  primitive  geometry  and  vestigial  kinematics  will  appear  even  so, 
as  will  be  seen  later.) 

1.3.1.2  The  non-geometrical  treatment — structure  of  the  vacuum.  A 
more  sophisticated  approach,  which  goes  far  towards  meeting  the 
desiderata  expressed  above,  is  this.17 

The  need  to  use  geometry  (and  kinematics)  merely  expresses  the 
fact  that  even  the  vacuum  (the  sites  not  now  occupied,  but  poten- 
tially occupiable,  by  the  constituent  organs  of  automata)  has  a  struc- 
ture. Now  3-dimensional  Euclidean  space  represents  (or,  represents 
with  an  approximation  that  is  sufficient  in  the  situation  envisaged) 
the  actual  "structure  of  the  vacuum."  Nevertheless,  this  structure 
involves  a  number  of  traits  which  are  unnecessarily  complicating. 

16  Von  Neumann,  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata,"  Collected 
Works  5.315-318.  [See  also  the  Fifth  Lecture  of  Part  I  above.] 

17  [Von  Neumann  was  going  to  refer  to  S.  Ulam  here.  See  Sec.  1.1.2.3  above.] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


L03 


While  these  will  have  to  be  considered  at  a  later  stage,  it  is  desirable 
to  eliminate  them  in  the  first  approach.  We  will  accordingly  try  to 
do  this. 

1.3.2  Stationarity — quiescent  vs.  active  states.  The  main  complication 
that  we  wish  to  remove  is  the  influence  of  kinematics,  that  is,  the 
necessity  of  moving  objects  around.  It  is  preferable  to  have  stationary 
objects  only,  normally  in  a  quiescent  state,  and  to  postulate  a  system 
which  will,  under  suitably  and  precisely  defined  conditions,  transfer 
them  from  the  quiescent  state  into  an  active  state — or  into  a  particular 
one  of  several  possible  active  states. 

1.3.3.1  Discrete  vs.  continuous  framework.  Next,  these  stationary 
and  normally  quiescent  objects  could  be  thought  of  as  discrete  en- 
tities, or  as  (infinitesimal)  elements  of  a  continuously  extended 
medium.  In  the  first  case  we  will  have  a  granular  or  cellular  structure, 
while  in  the  second  case  we  are  led  back  to  a  continuous  space, 
more  or  less  like  that  of  Euclidean  geometry. 

1.3.3.2  Homogeneity:  discrete  (crystalline)  and  continuous  (Eu- 
clidean). We  now  make  the  simplifying,  but  also  very  restrictive 
assumption,18  that  this  spatial  or  quasi-spatial  substratum  be  homoge- 
neous. That  is,  the  granular  structure  of  the  first  case  must  have 
crystalline  symmetry,19  while  the  continuous  space  of  the  second  case 
must  be  Euclidean.20  In  both  cases  this  degree  of  homogeneity  falls 
short  of  absolute  homogeneity.  Indeed,  we  have  only  postulated  the 
homogeneity  of  the  spatial  (or,  more  broadly,  combinatorial)  matrix 
which  carries  the  (quiescent  or  active)  objects  referred  to  above — the 
basic  organs — but  not  the  homogeneity  of  the  population  of  these 
objects.  That  is,  in  the  first  (discrete)  case,  we  have  not  postulated 
that  all  the  cells  of  the  crystal  behave  according  to  the  same  rules; 
and  in  the  second  (continuous)  case,  we  have  not  postulated  that 
the  continuous,  space-filling  medium  be  subject  everywhere  to  the 
same  rules.  Depending  on  whether  this  is,  or  is  not,  postulated,  we 
will  say  that  the  system  possesses,  or  does  not  possess,  intrinsic,  or 
functional,  homogeneity?1 

18  Calling  for  stronger  results.  [That  is,  it  is  more  difficult  to  construct  a  self- 
reproducing  automaton  in  a  homogeneous  medium  than  in  an  inhomogeneous 
medium.] 

19  [A  crystal  is  a  solid  body  having  a  regular  internal  structure  and  bounded 
by  symmetrically  arranged  plane  surfaces  intersecting  at  definite  and  charac- 
teristic angles.  The  regular  internal  structure  consists  of  the  rows  and  patterns 
of  atoms  of  the  crystal.  The  faces  of  the  crystal  express  this  regular  internal 
structure  externally.] 

20  [Apparently  von  Neumann  was  going  to  explain  in  this  footnote  why  he 
was  excluding  the  non-Euclidean  spaces  of  Bolyai-Lobachevski  and  Riemann.] 

21  [In  the  discrete  (crystalline,  granular,  cellular)  case,  functional  homoge- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Beyond  this,  an  even  more  complete  homogeneity  would  exist  if  all 
(discrete  or  infinitesimal)  elements  were  in  the  same  state,  for  exam- 
ple, in  the  quiescent  state  (cf.  above).  In  this  case  we  will  speak  of 
total  homogeneity  or  of  total  quiescence,  respectively.  This  can  obviously 
not  be  postulated  in  general,  since  it  would  exclude  any  positive  and 
organized  functioning  of  the  automaton,  for  example,  all  moves  in 
the  sense  of  questions  (B)-(E)  of  Section  1.1.2.1  above.  It  is,  how- 
ever, quite  reasonable  to  strive  to  assume  total  quiescence  as  the 
initial  state  of  an  automaton.  This  cannot  be  absolutely  enforced, 
since  with  the  usual  systems  of  rules  total  quiescence  is  a  self-per- 
petuating state  (cf.  later).  It  will,  however,  be  practical  to  assume  a 
totally  quiescent  initial  state  and  to  proceed  from  there  with  the 
injection  of  a  minimum  amount  of  external  stimulation  (cf.  later). 

1.3.3.3  Questions  of  structure:  (P)-(R).  The  point  made  at  the 
beginning  of  Section  1.3.3.2,  namely,  that  the  homogeneity  assump- 
tions of  Section  1.3.3.2  are  seriously  restrictive,  is  worth  elaborating 
somewhat  further.  Indeed,  even  the  manner  in  which  the  basic  organs 
of  the  discussion  of  question  (A)  (the  neurons  of  Section  1.2.1)  are 
ordinarily  strung  together  (cf.  later),  violates  the  first  principle  of 
homogeneity  formulated  in  Section  1.3.3.2,  that  of  the  underlying 
granular  structure,  i.e.,  its  crystalline  symmetry.  This  degree  of 
homogeneity  can,  however,  be  attained  by  some  rather  obvious  and 
simple  tricks,  as  will  be  seen  later. 

The  systems  that  are  thus  obtained  will,  however,  still  violate 
the  further,  stricter,  principle  of  homogeneity  formulated  in  Section 
1.3.3.2,  that  of  functional  homogeneity.  This  is  clearly  so,  as  long  as 
several  species  of  neurons  are  used  (cf.  Sec.  1.2.1,  particularly  Fig. 
3)  and  these  have  to  be  distributed  over  the  crystal  lattice  in  an 
irregular  (i.e.,  not  crystalline-symmetric)  manner.  However,  this 
use  of  several  species  of  neurons  and  this  distribution  of  them  in  an 
irregular  manner  are  natural  if  one  approaches  the  problem  in  the 
way  which  is  the  obvious  one  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ordinary 
logical  and  combinatorial  techniques  (cf.  later).  We  will  see  that  this 
difficulty,  too,  can  be  overcome  and  that  functional  homogeneity 
can  be  achieved.  This,  however,  is  considerably  less  easy,  and  it 
constitutes,  in  fact,  one  of  the  main  results  of  this  paper. 

The  homogeneity  problem  also  raises  some  ancillary  questions, 
which  will  successively  occupy  us  when  their  respective  turns  come. 
They  are  the  following : 

neity  means  that  each  cell  is  occupied  by  the  same  finite  automaton  and  each 
such  automaton  is  connected  to  its  neighbors  in  the  same  way.  The  particular 
cellular  structure  which  von  Neumann  adopts  in  Ch.  2  is  functionally  homoge- 
neous; see  Sec.  1.3.3.5  below.] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




(P)  Which  is  the  minimum  usable  dimensionality?  (This  question 
arises  both  in  the  first — discrete,  crystalline — and  in  the  second 
— continuous,  Euclidean — cases  of  Sees.  1.3.3.1  and  1.3.3.2.) 

(Q)  In  connection  with  functional  homogeneity,  can  we  require 
isotropy22  in  addition  to  homogeneity?  {In  the  crystalline  case 
this  is  meaningful  for  the  regular  crystal  class  only.23  Cf.  also 
question  (R).} 

(R)  In  the  crystalline  case,  which  crystal  classes  are  usable?  Or,  to 
introduce  our  real  aim  explicitly,  what  is  the  highest  degree  of 
regularity  that  can  be  used?23 

With  respect  to  question  (P),  one  would  expect  that  the  dimen- 
sionality 3  is  usable  and  probably  minimal.  In  fact  even  2  is  usable, 
while  it  seems  unlikely  that  1  should  be,  at  least  in  combination 
with  any  otherwise  plausible  postulates.24  These  questions  will  be 
considered  in  some  detail  later. 

Question  (Q)  will  be  considered  later;  it  will  appear  that  isotropy 
can  be  achieved,  although  non-iso tropic  models,  too,  can  be  of  con- 
siderable interest. 

As  to  question  (R),  we  will  use  the  maximum  regularity,  which  is 
reasonably  interpreted  as  the  (body-centered )  cubic  class  in  3  dimen- 
sions, and  the  corresponding  quadratic  class  in  2  dimensions,  the 
emphasis  being,  in  view  of  what  was  said  about  question  (P)  above, 
on  the  latter.  Some  other  classes,  however,  are  also  of  interest,  as  will 
be  seen  later. 

1.3.3.4  Nature  of  results,  crystalline  vs.  Euclidean:  statements  (X)~ 
(Z).  To  conclude  this  group  of  observations,  we  note  this.  We  sur- 
mise that  the  comparative  study  of  the  two  cases  of  Section  1.3.3.1 
{i.e.,  of  the  crystalline  (discrete)  and  of  the  continuous  (Euclidean) 
case}  will  prove  very  rewarding.  The  available  indications  point 
strongly  towards  these  conclusions: 

22  [A  substance  or  space  is  isotropic  insofar  as  it  has  the  same  properties  in 
all  directions.  In  the  crystalline  (discrete)  case,  functional  isotropy  means  that 
each  cell  is  connected  to  each  of  its  immediate  neighbors  in  the  same  way.  The 
particular  cellular  structure  which  von  Neumann  adopts  in  Ch.  2  is  functionally 
isotropic;  see  Sec.  1.3.3.5  below.] 

23  Crystal  classes  in  two  and  three  dimensions.  [Crystals  are  divided  into 
six  groups  or  systems  according  to  the  number  and  nature  of  the  axes  of  sym- 
metry. Crystals  belonging  to  the  cubic  system  (also  called  "the  isometric  sys- 
tem" and  "the  regular  system")  are  the  most  symmetrical  of  all  crystals.  In  a 
crystal  of  the  cubic  system  the  three  crystallographic  axes  of  reference  are  at 
right  angles  to  each  other  and  are  equal  in  length.  Crystals  having  a  cubic  cell 
and  crystals  having  an  octahedral  cell  are  the  simplest  of  the  forms  of  this 
class.] 

24  [Von  Neumann  was  going  to  make  a  reference  to  Julian  Bigelow  and  H. 
H.  Goldstine  here.  They  suggested  modeling  self -reproduction  in  2  rather  than 
3  dimensions.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-KEPRODUCINli  AUTOMATA 


(X)  The  general  possibilities  are  about  the  same  in  the  two  cases. 

(Y)  The  continuous  case  is  mathematically  much  more  difficult  than 
the  crystalline  case. 

(Z)  If  and  when  the  appropriate  analytical  methods  to  deal  with  the 
continuous  case  are  developed,  this  case  will  be  more  satisfac- 
tory and  more  broadly  and  relevantly  applicable  than  the 
crystalline  case. 

These  matters  will  be  discussed  in  somewhat  more  detail  later.  We 
will  make  now  only  one  more  observation,  which  relates  to  the  diffi- 
culties referred  to  in  conclusions  (Y)  and  (Z).  These  difficulties  are 
due  to  the  fact  that,  in  the  case  in  question,  the  mathematical  problem 
becomes  one  of  a  system  of  non-linear,  partial  differential  equations. 
It  may  be  of  some  significance  that  non-linear  partial  differential 
equations,  which  in  many  directions  define  and  limit  our  mathemati- 
cal horizon,  should  make  their  appearance  in  this  context  also. 

The  difficulties  referred  to  in  (Y)  and  (Z)  will  cause  us  to  direct 
our  attention  primarily  to  the  crystalline  case.  In  fact,  we  will  from 
now  on  always  have  this  case  in  mind,  except  where  the  opposite  is 
expressly  stated. 

[1.3.3.5  Homogeneity,  quiescence,  and  self -reproduction.  In  writing 
the  present  Part  II  of  this  volume,  von  Neumann  was  going  through 
a  process  of  reasoning  which  was  to  terminate  in  his  cellular  model 
of  self -reproduction.  At  these  early  stages  of  the  process  he  was 
exploring  various  possibilities,  leaving  specific  choices  until  later.  As 
the  inquiry  proceeded  his  terminology  necessarily  changed  somewhat. 
Thus  the  "quiescence"  of  Section  1.3.3.2  above  divides  into  "unexcita- 
bility"  and  "quiescence  of  an  excitable  cell"  in  Sections  1.3.4.1  and 
1.3.4.2  below.  A  brief  preview  of  the  final  outcome  may  help  the 
reader  to  follow  the  development  of  von  Neumann's  thought. 

Von  Neumann's  cellular  structure  is  described  in  detail  in  Chapter 
2  below.  He  chose  an  infinite  2-dimensional  array  of  square  cells. 
Each  cell  is  occupied  by  the  same  29-state  finite  automaton,  and 
each  such  automaton  is  connected  to  its  four  immediate  neighbors  in 
exactly  the  same  way;  that  is,  the  transition  rule  of  Chapter  2  below 
is  the  same  for  each  cell.  Hence  this  cellular  structure  is  "functionally 
homogeneous"  in  the  sense  of  Section  1.3.3.2  above.  Since  each  29- 
state  automaton  is  connected  to  each  of  its  four  neighbors  in  the  same 
way,  this  structure  is  also  isotropic  in  the  sense  of  Section  1.3.3.3 
above.  Functional  homogeneity  and  isotropy  have  only  to  do  with 
structure,  however,  and  not  with  content  or  state.  Consequently,  if 
different  cells  of  a  region  of  the  cellular  structure  are  in  different 
states,  one  part  of  the  region  may  act  in  one  way  and  send  informa- 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




tion  in  one  direction,  while  another  part  of  the  region  acts  in  a  differ- 
ent way  and  sends  information  in  a  different  direction. 

The  29  states  each  cell  is  capable  of  assuming  fall  into  three  cate- 
gories: unexcitable  (1),  excitable  (20),  and  sensitized  (8).  These 
are  listed  later  in  Figure  9. 

The  unexcitable  state  U  is  utterly  quiescent.  This  state  plays  a 
fundamental  role  with  respect  to  the  information  content  of  the 
cellular  structure,  for  this  structure  is  operated  in  such  a  way  that  at 
each  moment  of  time  only  a  finite  number  of  cells  of  the  structure  are 
in  some  state  other  than  the  unexcitable  state.  In  this  respect,  the 
unexcitable  state  of  von  Neumann's  system  is  analogous  to  a  blank 
square  on  the  tape  of  a  Turing  machine.  Indeed,  von  Neumann 
represented  zero  in  his  linear  array  L  by  the  unexcitable  state  U;  see 
Section  1.4.2.5  below. 

The  20  excitable  states  fall  into  three  classes.  There  are  4  confluent 
states  CCC'  ,  where  e  and  e  range  over  0  and  1;  the  value  "0"  sym- 
bolizes quiescence,  and  the  value  "1"  symbolizes  excitation.  There 
are  8  ordinary  transmission  states  T0ac  and  8  special  transmission 
states  Tiae ,  where  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3  and  e  =  0,  1  as  before.  Eight  trans- 
mission states  are  quiescent  and  8  are  excited.  The  sensitized  states  are 
transient  in  nature,  each  lasting  exactly  1  moment  of  time. 

The  set  of  10  states  consisting  of  the  unexcitable  state  U  and  the 
quiescent  states  Coo ,  Tuao  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3)  has  this  property: 
if  every  cell  of  the  infinite  cellular  structure  is  in  1  of  these  10  states, 
the  system  will  never  change  (i.e.,  no  cell  will  ever  change  state). 
The  difference  between  the  unexcitable  state  U  and  the  9  quiescent 
(but  excitable)  states  Coo ,  Twao  is  in  the  way  they  respond  to  stimuli 
(excitations).  Stimuli  entering  a  cell  which  is  in  the  unexcitable  state 
U  convert  that  cell  into  1  of  the  9  quiescent  states  C0o ,  Tuao .  This 
conversion  is  the  direct  process  of  Section  2.6  below.  The  direct  process 
takes  4  or  5  units  of  time,  the  sensitized  states  serving  as  interme- 
diaries in  the  process. 

A  stimulus  entering  a  cell  in  1  of  the  20  excitable  states  Ce6'  , 
TMac  (e,  e',  u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3)  does  one  of  two  things.  It  may 
change  the  cell  back  to  the  unexcitable  state  U;  this  is  the  reverse 
process  of  Section  2.5  below.  Alternatively,  this  stimulus  may  be 
switched,  combined  with  other  stimuli,  and  delayed  in  the  usual  way. 
In  particular,  a  quiescent  finite  automaton  may  be  embedded  in  an 
area  &  of  the  cellular  structure  by  putting  each  of  the  cells  of  &  in  1 
of  the  10  states  U,  Coo ,  and  Tuao .  If  such  a  finite  automaton  is  ap- 
propriately designed,  it  will  compute  in  the  usual  way  when  it  is 
stimulated  (activated). 




THEORY   OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


The  temporal  reference  frame  for  the  cellular  structure  consists 
of  the  times  •  •  •  —  3,  —  2,  —  1,  0,  1,  2,  3,  •  •  •  .  Von  Neumann  did  not 
say  exactly  how  he  planned  to  use  this  temporal  reference  frame,  but 
the  following  is  consistent  with  what  he  said.  All  cells  are  in  the  unex- 
citable  state  for  negative  times.  An  initial  cell  assignment  is  a  finite 
list  of  cells  together  with  an  assignment  of  a  state  to  each  cell  of  the 
list.  At  time  zero  an  initial  cell  assignment  is  imposed  on  the  cellular 
structure  from  the  "outside,"  all  cells  not  in  the  assignment  list  being 
left  in  the  unexcitable  state.  Thereafter  the  cellular  system  runs 
according  to  the  transition  rule  of  Chapter  2.  Each  initial  cell  arrange- 
ment determines  a  unique  history  of  the  infinite  cellular  structure. 
We  will  call  the  infinite  cellular  structure  together  with  an  initial 
cell  assignment  an  infinite  cellular  automaton. 

An  infinite  cellular  automaton  which  models  self-reproduction 
operates  as  follows.  The  finite  automaton  E  of  Section  1.6.1.2  below 
constitutes  an  initial  cell  assignment.  More  specifically,  the  initial 
or  starting  state  of  this  finite  automaton  E  is  an  initial  cell  assignment. 
We  impose  this  initial  cell  assignment  on  the  cellular  structure  at 
time  zero,  thereby  embedding  the  finite  automaton  E  in  the  cellular 
structure.  Let  &  be  the  area  of  cells  affected,  so  that  initially  all  cells 
outside  &  are  unexcitable.  The  logical  structure  of  E  is  such  that  at 
some  later  time  r  another  copy  of  E  will  appear  in  another  area  o! 
of  the  cellular  structure.  That  is,  the  state  of  each  cell  of  &'  at  time 
r  is  identical  to  the  state  of  the  corresponding  cell  of  &  at  time  zero. 
Thus  E  reproduces  itself  in  area  d' .  In  summary,  this  infinite  cellular 
automaton  has  only  one  copy  of  E  embedded  in  it  at  time  zero,  but 
two  copies  of  E  embedded  in  it  at  time  r.  This  is  self -reproduction. 

Let  us  look  at  the  temporal  development  of  an  infinite  cellular 
automaton.  At  negative  times  it  is  totally  homogeneous  in  the  sense 
of  Section  1.3.3.2  above,  all  cells  being  unexcitable.  At  time  zero  this 
total  homogeneity  is  modified  by  the  introduction  of  inhomogeneity 
in  a  finite  area.  This  inhomogeneity  will,  in  general,  propagate  into 
surrounding  areas.  In  the  case  of  self -reproduction,  the  inhomogeneity 
of  area  Ct  spreads  until  area  d'  is  organized  in  the  same  way  as  area  d. 

The  above  treatment  of  infinite  cellular  automata  makes  no  essen- 
tial use  of  negative  times.  Since  all  cells  are  unexcitable  at  these  times 
we  could  use  only  the  times  0,  1,  2,  3,  •  •  •  without  any  loss  of  general- 
ity. Von  Neumann  did  not  say  why  he  introduced  negative  times.  It 
is  possible  that  he  planned  to  use  them  in  connection  with  a  probabi- 
listic model  of  self-reproduction  and  evolution  (see  the  end  of  Sec. 
1.1.2.3  above).] 

1.8.4-1  Simplification  of  the  problems  of  construction  by  the  treatment 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




according  to  Section  1.3.1.2.  We  can  now  return  to  the  original  thought 
of  Sections  1.2.2-1.3.3.1,  that  is,  to  the  necessity  of  having  organs 
that  perform  analogs  of  the  muscular  rather  than  of  the  neural  func- 
tion. In  other  words,  we  need  organs  which  are  concerned  with  the 
acquiring,  positioning,  and  connecting  of  the  basic  organs  of  the 
automata  under  construction,  rather  than  with  purely  logical  opera- 
tions in  the  sense  of  Section  1.2.1.  Since  the  properly  kinematic 
aspects  of  "acquiring"  and  "positioning"  have  been  removed  by  the 
observations  of  Sections  1.3.1.2  and  1.3.2,  the  nature  of  the  function, 
referred  to  above  as  an  "analog  of  the  muscular,"  must  now  be  re- 
considered. 

The  remark  at  the  end  of  Section  1.3.2  makes  it  clear  that  this 
function  now  appears  under  the  aspect  of  causing  an  object — or,  to 
use  a  terminology  suggested  by  Section  1.3.3.1,  a  cell — which  is  in  a 
quiescent  state,  to  go  over  into  a  suitable  active  state.  Now  the  logical 
functions,  as  discussed  in  Section  1.2.1,  also  do  this,  but  there  is  a 
difference  here  or,  at  least,  a  possibility  of  a  difference.  The  nature  of 
this  difference  can  be  best  illustrated  by  a  physiological  simile. 

1.8.4.2  Quiescence  vs.  activity;  excitability  vs.  unexcitability;  ordinary 
and  special  stimuli.  A  neuron  may  be  quiescent  or  active,  but  it  is 
at  any  rate  potentially  active;  that  is,  if  is  an  excitable  cell.  Connective 
tissue,  on  the  other  hand,  consists  of  unexcitable,  truly  passive  cells. 
So  far  the  difference  between  an  excitable,  but  (momentarily)  quies- 
cent cell,  and  a  (permanently)  passive  cell  is  obvious.  Now  let  us  for 
a  moment  introduce  the  fiction  that  the  growth  of  neurons  (i.e.,  of 
excitable  cells)  occurs  not  by  the  formation  of  new  cells,  but  by  the 
transformation  of  existing,  unexcitable  cells  into  excitable  ones.  It 
should  be  noted  that,  while  this  is  not  so  in  reality,  it  is  the  arrange- 
ment that  fits  best  into  the  picture  of  stationary  cells  introduced  in 
Section  1.3.2.  To  reconcile  this  with  reality,  one  may  have  to  inter- 
pret the  absence  of  a  cell  as  the  presence  of  one  in  a  special,  particu- 
larly unexcitable  state.  This  concept  is  in  reasonable  harmony  with 
the  one  relating  to  a  "structure  of  the  vacuum,"  as  used  in  Section 
1.3.1.2. 

Such  a  transformation  must  itself  be  induced  by  some  special 
stimuli,  i.e.,  by  some  special  active  states  of  neighboring  cells.  The 
ordinary  stimuli  (i.e.,  the  ordinary  active  states)  which  control  the 
logical  functions  discussed  in  Section  1.2.1  cannot  do  this.  These 
stimuli  control  transitions  between  quiescent  and  ordinary  active 
states,  but  in  excitable  cells  only,  and  without  ever  changing  the 
species  (in  the  sense  of  Sec.  1.2.1)  of  the  cell  (neuron)  in  question. 
Indeed  it  was  just  with  respect  to  these  ordinary  stimulations  that 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


unexcitability  was  defined  above.  In  order  to  provide  an  equivalent 
of  growth,  the  special  stimulations  referred  to  above  must  be  able  to 
cause  transitions  from  unexcitability  to  excitability,  and  also  to  de- 
termine the  specific  species  (in  the  sense  of  Sec.  1.2.1 )  of  the  excitable 
cell  (neuron)  thus  created. 

These  concepts  permit  us  to  define  the  difference  between  quies- 
cence (with  excitability)  and  unexcitability;  the  former  responds  to 
(i.e.,  is  removed  by)  ordinary  stimuli,  the  latter  only  to  special  ones. 
This  has,  of  course,  only  shifted  the  distinction  into  one  between 
ordinary  and  special  stimuli,  that  is,  into  a  distinction  between  ordi- 
nary and  special  active  states.  Leaving  the  physiological  simile,  and 
returning  to  the  mathematical  problem  at  hand,  the  matter  still 
presents  some  dubious  aspects. 

1.3.4.3  Critique  of  the  distinctions  of  Section  1.3.4.2.  Indeed,  one 
must  now  consider  critically  the  usefulness  of  the  distinction  between 
ordinary  and  special  stimuli.  As  outlined  above,  the  underlying  idea 
is  this.  Ordinary  stimuli  are  to  be  used  for  logical  operations,  taking 
the  species  of  the  neurons  that  are  involved  as  fixed;  that  is,  ordinary 
stimuli  are  to  be  used  for  the  control  and  utilization  of  already  satis- 
factorily organized  sub-assemblies.  Special  stimuli  are  to  be  used 
for  growth  operations,  involving  the  introduction  of  excitability,  to- 
gether with  a  new  determination  of  the  neuronic  species,  into  pre- 
viously unexcitable,  or  otherwise  different  areas.  In  other  words, 
special  stimuli  are  used  for  the  organization  (according  to  some  logi- 
cally determined  plan)  of  hitherto  unorganized  (or  differently  organ- 
ized) areas. 

This  distinction  is  certainly  convenient  for  a  first  approach,  since 
it  permits  one  to  keep  conceptually  fairly  distinct  functions  quite 
sharply  distinct  in  their  actual  embodiment  and  performance.  We  will 
therefore  adhere  to  it  strictly  in  our  first  constructions  (cf.  later). 
However,  it  is  quite  possible  to  relax  it  by  various  logical  and  combina- 
torial devices  to  varying  degrees,  up  to  (and  including)  complete 
obliteration.  These  turn  out  subsequently  to  be  quite  desirable  for 
various  mathematical  and  conceptual  reasons,  and  we  will  therefore 
introduce  them  in  our  later  constructions  (cf.  later). 

[  Logical  functions  and  growth  functions  are  fairly  distinct  con- 
ceptually. In  his  preliminary  discussion  von  Neumann  made  a  sharp 
distinction  between  their  respective  representations  in  his  cellular 
system.  Logical  functions  are  performed  by  ordinary  stimuli,  and 
growth  functions  are  performed  by  special  stimuli.  Later  he  relaxed 
the  distinction  somewhat  by  using  both  types  of  stimuli  for  both 
types  of  functions. 


(JEN  ERA  L  CO  N  S 1 1)  EH  ATI  ONS 


The  final  distinction  between  ordinary  and  special  stimuli  is  shown 
in  Figure  9.  Both  ordinary  and  special  transmission  stimuli  bring 
about  "growth"  from  the  unexcitable  state  U  to  one  of  the  nine 
quiescent  states  Coo  >  TM«o  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3);  this  is  the  direct 
process  of  Section  2.6  and  Figure  10  below.  Special  transmission 
stimuli  change  an  ordinary  transmission  state  T0«€  (a  =  0,  1,  2,  3; 
e  =  0,  1)  or  a  confluent  state  C€C'  (e,  e  =  0,  1)  into  the  unexcitable 
state  U,  while  ordinary  transmission  stimuli  change  a  special  trans- 
mission state  Tiac  (a  =  0,  1,  2,  3;  c  =  0,  1)  into  the  unexcitable 
state  U;  this  is  the  reverse  process  of  Section  2.5  below. 

The  logical  functions  of  disjunction,  conjunction,  and  delay  will 
normally  be  performed  by  arrays  of  ordinary  transmission  and  con- 
fluent states.  The  logical  function  of  negation  is  not  directly  repre- 
sented in  von  Neumann's  system.  Instead,  negation  will  be  accom- 
plished by  breaking  a  communication  path  and  later  restoring  it. 
The  breaking  will  be  done  by  the  reverse  process  and  the  restoring 
by  the  direct  process.  An  example  is  given  in  Figure  17  of  Section  3.2 
below.] 

1.4  General  Construction  Schemes — Question  (B)  Continued 

1.4.1.1  Construction  of  cell  aggregates — the  built-in  plan.  The  discus- 
sion up  to  this  point  (i.e.,  in  Sees.  1.2.2-1.3.4.3)  dealt  only  with  the 
first  part  of  question  (B),  the  immediate  problems  of  the  construc- 
tion of  one  automaton  by  another  automaton.  We  can  now  pass  to 
the  second  part  of  question  (B),  i.e.,  consider  by  what  means  a  single 
automaton  can  be  made  to  construct  broad  classes  of  other  automata, 
and  how  variable,  but  essentially  standard,  attachments  can  be  used 
to  facilitate  and  extend  this  process. 

Our  discussion  dealt  so  far  only  with  the  question:  By  what  means 
can  a  single  cell  of  specified  characteristics  be  created?  In  this  respect 
we  developed  some  orienting  principles.  There  remains  the  question 
of  how  this  operation  is  to  be  controlled  in  all  its  details.  It  is  clear 
that  this  will  have  to  be  done  by  the  logical  section  of  the  primary 
(parent)  automaton,  which  was  considered  in  Section  1.2.1.  It  is 
also  natural  that  this  logical  section  of  the  primary  automaton  must 
supervise  and  sequence  the  multiplicity  of  acts  of  single-cell  creation, 
which  are  necessary  to  produce  the  complete  secondary  (constructed ) 
automaton. 

This  "sequencing"  of  the  single  cell  creations  has  to  be  controlled 
by  a  logical  pattern  which  is  already  laid  out  in  the  logical  section  of 
the  primary  automaton.  Such  a  "logical  pattern"  is  obviously  neither 
more  nor  less  than  the  complete  "plan"  of  the  secondary  automaton 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


— functionally  laid  out  within  the  primary  automaton  in  "terms" 
that  the  primary  automaton  can  "understand"  and  act  on. 

Thus  the  plan  of  the  secondary  automaton  must  be  "built  into"  the 
primary  automaton,  presumably  in  terms  of  logical  connections  in  the 
sense  of  Section  1.2.1. 

1.4.1.2  The  three  schemes  for  building  in  multiple  plans — the  para- 
metric form.  The  conclusion  of  Section  1.4.1.1  is  that  a  primary  autom- 
aton, constructed  for  this  purpose,  is  prima  facie  (i.e.,  assuming 
the  simplest  type  of  design,  which  presents  itself  most  immediately) 
suited  to  construct  one  and  only  one  secondary  automaton.  Generali- 
zations beyond  this  level  are,  however,  immediate. 

First,  it  is,  of  course,  possible  to  have  the  plans  of  several  (different) 
secondary  automata  built  into  the  primary.  Second,  it  is  possible  to 
incorporate  the  logical  facilities  that  will  make  the  primary  autom- 
aton construct  a  specific  secondary  several  times,  e.g.,  a  certain, 
preassigned  number  of  times.  Third,  the  plan  of  the  secondary  may 
contain  a  number  of  numerical  parameters;  and  this  plan  can  be 
built  into  the  primary  in  this  (variable)  parametric  form,  together 
with  facilities  that  make  it  possible  to  substitute  any  desired  numeri- 
cal values  for  these  parameters. 

The  third  scheme — or,  rather,  the  combination  of  the  second  and 
the  third  schemes — is  the  most  general  of  these.  In  their  immediate 
form,  however,  these  still  contain  a  limitation,  that  is,  a  limitation  of 
the  numbers  that  can  be  used  for  the  parameter  values  (third  scheme ) 
and  for  the  number  of  repetitions  (second  scheme).  Indeed,  these 
numbers  must  be  present  in  some  form  in  the  interior  of  the  primary 
automaton,  say  in  a  digital  representation.  Assume  that  p  such  num- 
bers are  involved,  and  that  they  are  all  integers  ^  0,  say,  vi ,  •  •  •  , 
vp  .  Let  each  one  of  those  cells,  which  are  to  be  used  for  their  repre- 
sentation, have  k  states  available  for  this  purpose.  It  is  best  to  in- 
terpret these  states  as  the  base  k  digits  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  k  —  1.  Let 
such  cells  be  available  for  vi ,  where  i  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  p;  this  requires  a 
total  of  n  =  ni  +  •  •  •  +  np  cells.  Vi  is  thus  expressed  by  nt  digits  in  a 
base  k  digital  notation;  hence  it  is  limited  to  the  kni  values  0,  1,  •  •  •  , 
kni  -  1. 

1.4.2.1  The  descriptive  statement  L  for  numerical  parameters.  The 
limitation  just  described  can  be  circumvented  by  a  simple  trick:  let 
these  cells  lie  "outside"  (i.e.,  not  within  the  area  of  the  primary 
automaton,  but  next  to  it),  in  the  external,  otherwise  quiescent,  re- 
gion of  the  crystal.  They  might,  for  example,  form  a  linear  array  L 
extending  in  the  right  hand  (i.e.,  positive  x)  direction  away  from  the 
area  of  the  primary  automaton.  The  k  states  used  for  these  "nota- 
tional"  purposes  must,  of  course,  also  be  of  a  quasi-quiescent  charac- 


GENERA L  ( JONS]  I >EIt ATI ONR 


ter,  i.e.,  such  that  they  will  normally  not  disturb  (stimulate  or  other- 
wise transform)  each  other  or  the  surrounding  quiescent  cells.  This, 
however,  is  a  desideratum  that  is  easy  to  meet  (cf.  later).  The  pri- 
mary automaton  must  then  be  endowed  with  the  ability  to  establish 
contact  with  all  parts  of  this  linear  array  L,  and  to  have  its  operations 
controlled,  in  the  desired  sense,  by  the  "notational"  (i.e.,  base  k 
digital)  states  of  the  cells  of  L.  One  might,  at  first  sight,  expect 
difficulties  in  trying  to  do  this  for  all  possible  L  (for  all  possible  sizes 
of  L,  i.e.,  of  n)  with  a  fixed,  limited  primary  automaton.  All  these 
difficulties  can,  however,  be  overcome  by  fairly  straightforward 
methods,  as  will  appear  when  this  matter  is  considered  in  detail  [See 
Sec.  1.4.2.5  below].  We  will  mention  here  only  one  of  them. 

One  might  think  that  the  "exploration"  of  L  is  not  possible  without 
specifying — i.e.,  expressing  within  the  primary  automaton — the  size 
of  L,  i.e.,  n.  In  fact,  it  would  seem  natural  that  p  and  all  the  v%  ,  •  •  •  , 
vp  ,  must  be  so  specified.  This  would  again  limit  p  and  U\ ,  •  •  •  ,  np , 
since  the  primary  automaton  is  a  fixed  entity,  and  hence  it  would 
limit  L  and  through  it  the  numbers  that  it  represents. 

This  difficulty  can  be  removed  as  follows.  Let  each  cell  in  L  have 
k  states  for  notational  purposes  as  before;  i.e.,  the  states  corresponding 
to  the  digits  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  k  —  1,  and  two  additional  states  to  be  called 
comma  and  period.  (All  of  these  states  must  be  "quasi-quiescent"  in 
the  sense  indicated  above.)  Within  L,  the  numbers  p  and  v\ ,  •  •  •  , 
vp  consist  only  of  cells  in  digital  states.  Now  let  L  be  lined  up  as 
follows  (proceeding  from  left  to  right,  i.e.,  in  the  positive  .t-direction). 
The  digits  of  p,  a  comma,  the  digits  of  v\  ,  a  comma,  •  •  •  ,  the  digits 
of  Vp  ,  a  period.  The  primary  automaton,  in  "exploring"  L,  can  sense 
the  comma  and  the  period  and  thereby  ascertain  the  sizes  of  p  and 
of  the  vi  ,  •  •  •  ,  Vp  no  matter  what  these  are. 

14.2.2  Applications  of  L.  The  linear  array  L  of  Section  1.4.2.1 
is  the  variable,  but  essentially  standard  attachment  mentioned  in 
question  (B).  It  is  the  simple  addendum  to  the  primary  automaton, 
which,  although  essentially  quiescent  and  possessed  only  of  the  most 
rudimentary  structure,  expands  the  active  potentialities  of  that 
automaton  substantially,  as  appeared  in  Section  1.4.2.1.  The  possi- 
bilities that  are  inherent  in  this  device  will,  however,  become  really 
clear  only  after  this.  The  main  application  in  this  sense  will  be  de- 
scribed later  [Sees.  1.5  and  1.6].  We  will  consider  first  a  lesser  applica- 
tion. 

1.4.2.8  Use  of  L  as  an  unlimited  memory  for  (A).  The  last  men- 
tioned application  relates  to  the  attachments  to  a  purely  logical 
automaton,  referred  to  in  question  (A). 

The  setup  for  purely  logical  functions  (in  the  sense  of  (A),  as  dis- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


cussed  in  Section  1.2.1)  fails  to  be  universal  because  of  the  absence  of 
one  constituent:  an  arbitrarily  large  memory  which  is  finite  but  of 
adjustable  size  (cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  1.2.1).  The  linear  array  L,  as 
described  in  Section  1.4.2.1,  is  just  that.  Hence  L,  with  its  ancillary 
observation,  exploration,  and  construction  facilities,  provides  the 
(variable,  but  in  the  essential  respects  standard)  attachment  to  the 
logical  automaton,  which  bridges  the  gap  to  logical  universality,  as 
indicated  in  question  (A).  It  should  be  noted  that  the  need  for  the 
facilities  ancillary  to  L,  referred  to  above,  means  that  componentry 
which  is  normally  called  for  in  the  primary  (construction)  automata 
of  (B)  must  also  be  introduced  into  the  (logical)  automata  of  (A), 
if  logical  universality  is  an  aim.  For  the  details  of  all  this,  cf.  later 
[Chapters  4  and  5]. 

14-® 4  Use  of  base  two  for  L.  One  more  remark  about  the  cells  of 
L  is  in  order:  we  can  choose  k  =  2,  i.e.,  let  all  representations  of 
numbers  be  base  2.  Then  each  cell  in  L  must  have  k  +  2  =  4  states 
for  the  purposes  now  under  consideration  (cf.  the  discussion  in  Sec. 
1.4.2.1).  If  it  is  now  desired  to  keep  the  number  of  states  for  nota- 
tional  purposes  at  2,  this  can  still  be  achieved.  It  suffices  to  replace 
each  cell  of  L  by  2  cells,  since  a  pair  of  2-valued  states  allows  22  =  4 
combinations. 

The  digitalization  and  punctuation  scheme  for  L  meets  all  the  re- 
quirements of  Section  1.4.2.1.  It  is,  however,  not  the  only  possible  one. 
The  following  is  an  obvious  variant.  Keep  the  punctuation  states 
(the  comma  and  the  period),  as  in  Section  1.4.2.1.  Instead  of  the  two 
base  2  digital  states,  designated  0  and  1,  use  only  one,  designated  1. 
Designate  a  number  v  (an  integer  ^  0),  not  by  a  sequence  of  0's  and 
l's,  which  express  its  base  2  digital  expansion,  but  simply  by  a  se- 
quence of  v  l's.  This  representation  is  a  good  deal  longer  than  that 
of  Section  1.4.2.1  (v  symbols  instead  of  n,  where  n  is  the  smallest 
integer  with  2n  >  v,  i.e.,  with  n  >  2log  v),  but  it  is  more  simply 
defined,  and  more  simply  exploitable  (in  the  sense  of  the  ancillary 
functions  referred  to  in  Sec.  1.4.2.3).  For  a  detailed  consideration,  cf. 
later. 

[14-®>5  The  linear  array  L.  It  may  be  helpful  at  this  point  to 
anticipate  von  Neumann's  design  of  the  mechanism  for  reading  and 
writing  on  an  arbitrary  cell  of  the  unlimited  linear  array  L. 

Let  us  begin  with  a  Turing  machine,  which  is  a  finite  automaton 
connected  to  an  indefinitely  extendible  or  infinite  tape.  The  tape  is 
divided  into  squares,  each  of  which  contains  any  one  of  a  finite  num- 
ber of  characters  (i.e.,  is  in  any  one  of  a  finite  number  of  states). 
Let  the  basic  alphabet  consist  of  two  characters:  zero  and  one,  repre- 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


1 15 


sented  by  a  blank  and  a  mark,  respectively.  At  any  given  time  the 
finite  automaton  senses  one  square  of  the  tape.  It  can  change  the 
contents  of  this  square  (make  a  mark  or  erase  a  mark  already  there) 
and  move  the  tape  one  square  to  the  left  or  right,  so  that  at  the  next 
moment  of  time  it  senses  an  adjacent  square.  Thus  the  finite  autom- 
aton can,  in  a  finite  amount  of  time,  gain  access  to,  read,  and  modify 
any  square  of  the  tape. 

It  is  clear  that  accessibility  of  an  arbitrary  tape  square  is  the  im- 
portant thing,  and  having  the  tape  move  is  only  a  means  to  this  end. 
Alternatively,  we  can  have  the  tape  stand  still  and  the  finite  autom- 
aton move  back  and  forth  along  it.  Or,  we  can  have  both  the  finite 
automaton  and  the  tape  stand  still,  and  let  the  finite  automaton 
communicate  to  an  arbitrary  square  xn  by  means  of  a  contractable 
and  indefinitely  extendible  "wire."  The  finite  automaton  can  sense 
and  modify  the  state  of  square  xn  through  this  wire.  Then  the  finite 
automaton  can  extend  the  wire  to  square  xn+i ,  or  contract  it  to 
square  xn-i . 

This  last  procedure  is  the  one  von  Neumann  used  in  his  cellular 
system.  The  details  are  given  in  Chapter  4  below.  We  will  explain 
the  basic  idea  in  connection  with  Figure  37.  The  memory  control 
MC  is  a  finite  cellular  automaton  occupying  the  area  indicated  in 
that  figure.  L  is  an  infinite  array  of  cells  extending  to  the  right. 
"Zero"  is  represented  in  cell  xn  by  the  unexcitable  state  U,  and  "one" 
is  represented  by  the  quiescent  but  excitable  state  T030 ,  which  is  an 
ordinary  transmission  state  directed  downward. 

To  read  cell  xn  ,  the  memory  control  MC  sends  a  sequence  of 
stimuli  around  the  connecting  loop  Ci  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows. 
This  sequence  passes  through  xn  without  affecting  its  neighbors 
xn-i  and  .rn+i ,  is  modified  according  to  the  state  of  xn  ,  and  returns 
to  the  memory  control  MC  with  a  representation  of  the  contents  of 
xn  .  The  memory  control  MC  then  writes  on  xn  and  either  extends 
the  loop  Ci  so  that  it  passes  through  cell  xn+i ,  or  contracts  the  loop 
Ci  so  that  it  passes  through  cell  xn-i  .  The  timing  loop  C2  is  used 
in  this  extension-contraction  process  and  is  extended  (or  contracted ) 
along  with  loop  Ci  . 

There  are  finitely  many  basic  characters  to  be  represented  on  L, 
including  the  period  and  comma.  These  are  represented  by  binary 
sequences  of  some  length  k,  and  each  character  is  stored  in  k  cells  of 
L.  Initially,  we  will  place  a  finite  sequence  of  characters  on  L,  of 
which  the  last  one,  and  only  the  last  one,  is  a  period.  Now,  the  memory 
control  MC  can  sense  the  period  and  move  it  to  the  right  or  left  as 
it  expands  or  contracts  the  information  on  L.  Hence,  though  MC  is 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCI NG  AUTOMATA 


of  finite,  fixed  capacity,  there  is  no  bound  to  the  amount  of  informa- 
tion on  L  with  which  it  can  interact.] 

1.5  Universal   Construction   Schemes — Question  (C) 

1.5.1  Use  of  L  for  non-numerical  (universal)  parametrization.  The 
schemes  of  Section  1.4.2.1  (together  with  Sec.  1.4.1.2)  introduced  an 
important  broadening  of  the  class  of  secondary  automata  that  arc 
constructible  by  one,  suitably  given,  (fixed)  primary  automaton,  in 
the  sense  of  the  second  question  of  (B).  They  do  not,  however, 
achieve  immediately  the  construction  universality  that  is  the  aim 
of  question  (C).  We  will  now  get  this,  too,  by  introducing  one  further- 
variation  into  the  methods  of  Section  1.4.2.1. 

The  class  of  secondary  automata  which  can  be  constructed  accord- 
ing to  Section  1.4.2.1  by  a  single  primary  automaton  is  limited  in  this 
sense.  (We  disregard  for  a  moment  the  influence  of  Sec.  1.4.1.2.) 
These  (secondary)  automata  may  represent  a  broad  class,  but  they 
must  nevertheless  all  be  particular  specimens  from  a  common  species; 
that  is,  their  individual  (construction)  plans  all  derive  from  a  common 
master  plan  in  which  certain  available  parameters  are  specifically 
numerically  substituted.  In  other  words,  even  though  the  specific 
plan  of  the  secondary  automaton  must  no  longer  be  built  into  the 
primary  automaton,  nevertheless  the  underlying,  generic  plan — the 
plan  that  controls  all  the  subordinate  plans — must  be  built  in  there. 

1.5.2  The  universal  type  of  plan.  Consider  an  arbitrary  (but 
specifically  given)  secondary  automaton  and  the  possible  ways  to 
describe  it.  The  following  is  certainly  an  adequate  one: 

(a)  Specify  the  (two)  x  and  the  (two)  y  coordinates  of  the  four 
sides  of  a  rectangular  area  in  which  the  entire  secondary  automaton 
is  to  be  contained.  Let  these  coordinates  be  X\  ,  2/1  ,  x2 ,  and  2/2  .  These 
coordinates  should  be  counted  from  an  origin  which  is  at  a  suitably 
designated  point  within  the  area  of  the  primary  automaton. 

It  is  actually  better  to  introduce  the  side  lengths  a  =  x2  —  x\  +  1, 
0  =  2/2  —  yi  +  1  (assuming  x\  S  £2,2/1  ^  2/2)  of  the  rectangular 
area  containing  the  secondary,  and  to  use  the  numbers  £1,2/1,  «,  0. 

(b)  According  to  (a)  above,  each  cell  within  the  rectangle  covering 
the  secondary  can  be  characterized  by  two  coordinates  i  (=  0,  1,  •  • 

a  —  1),  j  (=  0,  1,  "  •  j  P  —  1).  (To  be  precise,  with  respect  to  the 
system  of  coordinates  used  in  (a)  above,  the  coordinates  of  the  cell 
iy  j  are  Xi  +  i,  2/1  +  j*)  This  gives,  as  it  should,  a/3  cells  in  the  rec- 
tangle covering  the  secondary.  Let  £  be  the  number  of  states  that 
each  one  of  these  cells  can  assume,  using  accordingly  an  index  X  = 
0,  1,  •••,<£  —  1  to  enumerate  these  states.  Designate  by  \ij  the 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




state  of  cell  which  is  desired  (on  the  basis  of  the  plan  of  the 

secondary  automaton  in  question)  for  the  moment  when  the  construc- 
tion of  this  automaton  is  just  completed. 

It  is  clear  from  (a)  and  (b)  that  the  secondary  automaton  is 
completely  characterized  by  the  specification  of  the  numbers  xx  , 
7/1 ,  a,  j8  and  X»v  for  all  pairs  i  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  a  —  1;  j  =*  0,  1,  •  •  •  , 
0-1- 

Note  that  these  numbers  have  the  following  ranges: 

xi ,  yx  =  0,  ±1,  ±2  -  -  •  . 
a9fi  -  1,2,  . 
Xty     0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  <£  —  1    for    i  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  a  —  1; 

/  ~  0,1,       ,0  -  1. 

To  conclude,  x\  ,  y\  are  better  represented  by  specifying  their 
absolute  values  \xi\,  \yi\  and  two  numbers  e,  77: 

{ =  0    for   xi  =  0 1  f=  0    for  yi^0\ 

e  {=  1    for   xx  <  0|,      77  \=  1    for   2/j  <  0|. 

Thus  the  sequence  (of  integers  =0) 

(«,  ^,  l^il,  |  r/i  |,  a,  /S, 
(*)  fa   for   <  =  0,1,  1;      j  =  0,  1,       ,0  -  1 

[  (the  Xty  are  to  be  thought  of  as  lexicographically  ordered  by 

contains  a  complete  description  of  the  desired  secondary  automaton, 
in  the  condition — i.e.,  with  the  cell-states — actually  desired  for  its 
initial  moment,  immediately  after  completion. 

This  sequence  of  numbers  may  now  be  treated  with  the  method 
described  in  Section  1.4.2.1  for  the  simpler  sequence  that  occurred 
there  (the  sequence  p,  v\ ,  •  •  •  ,  vp).  That  is,  we  can  form  a  linear 
array  of  cells  L,  extending  in  the  right  hand  (i.e.,  positive  x)  direc- 
tion, and  made  up  as  follows:  the  numbers  enumerated  in  formula (*) 
in  the  order  in  which  they  appear  there,  each  represented  by  its  base 
k  digital  expansion,  any  two  consecutive  ones  separated  by  a  comma, 
and  the  last  one  followed  by  a  period.  The  general  description  above 
plays  now  precisely  the  role  of  the  general  plan  of  a  class  of  secondary 
automata,  which  contains  parameters,  as  described  in  connection 
with  the  third  scheme  in  Section  1.4.1.2.  In  addition  to  this,  the  linear 
array  L  introduced  above  is  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  linear  array 
L  introduced  in  Section  1.4.2.1:  it  specifies  the  numerical  values  that 
have  to  be  substituted  for  the  parameters  of  the  general  description. 
Thus  the  present  description  of  an  arbitrary  secondary  automaton  has 
been  made  to  fit  entirely  into  the  parametrization  pattern  of  the 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


third  scheme  of  Section  1.4.1.2.  Since  it  is  entirely  unrestricted,  this 
means  that  the  universality  referred  to  in  question  (C)  can  be 
achieved  in  this  way. 

1.6  Self -Reproduction — Question  (D) 

1.6.1.1  The  apparent  difficulty  of  using  L  in  the  case  of  self-reproduc- 
tion. Let  us  now  consider  question  (D),  that  is,  the  problem  of  self- 
reproduction. 

The  a  priori  argument  against  the  possibility  of  self-reproduction 
is  that  it  is  natural  to  expect  the  constructing  automaton  to  be  more 
complex  than  the  constructed  one — i.e.,  the  primary  will  be  more 
complex  than  the  secondary.25  This  is  confirmed  by  the  results  out- 
lined in  Sections  1.2.2-1.4.1.1,  i.e.,  those  dealing  with  the  first  ques- 
tion in  (B) :  the  primary  must  contain  a  complete  plan  of  the  second- 
ary (cf.  Sec.  1.4.1.1),  and  in  this  sense  the  primary  is  more  complex 
than  the  secondary.  This  limitation  is  somewhat  transformed,  but 
not  removed,  by  the  subsequent  developments  of  Sections  1.4.1.1- 
1.5.2;  even  the  strongest  one  among  the  results  that  are  discussed 
there  (the  answer  to  question  (C)  in  Sec.  1.5.2,  securing  universality) 
is  subject  to  one  form  of  it.  Indeed,  this  result  calls  for  a  complete 
description  of  the  secondary,  expressed  by  the  linear  array  of  cells  L, 
to  be  attached  to  the  primary. 

If  one  tried  to  pass  from  here  directly  to  self-reproduction,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  have  an  automaton  which  can  contain  its  own  plan,  for 
example,  in  the  form  L.  If  the  second  question  of  (D)  is  included, 
it  would  also  have  to  contain  the  plan  (i.e.,  the  L)  of  another,  pre- 
scribed automaton. 

With  the  scheme  of  Section  1.5.2,  even  the  first  is  impossible:  the 
(secondary)  automaton  considered  there  has  no  more  than  af3  cells, 
while  L  (according  to  formula  (*)  in  Sec.  1.5.2)  consists  of  a/3  +  6 
digitalized  numbers,  afi  +  5  commas,  and  a  period  (i.e.,  2a/3  +  12 
or  more  cells).  Many  variants  on  this  theme  are  possible,  but  none 
has  yet  appeared  which,  when  directly  used,  overcomes  this  diffi- 
culty. However,  there  is  an  indirect  method  that  circumvents  it. 

1.6.1.2  Circumvention  of  the  difficulty — the  types  E  and  EF  .  This 
method  is  as  follows.26 

Designate  the  universal  (primary)  automaton  of  Section  1.5.2  by 
A.  A  constructs  any  secondary  whose  description  L  is  attached  to  A, 
as  described  in  Section  1.5.2. 

25  [See  also  pp.  79-80  above.] 

26  Von  Neumann,  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata."  [See 
also  pp.  84-87  above.] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




It  is  possible  to  design  and  to  position  at  a  definite  place  adjacent 
to  A  another  automaton  B  with  the  following  function.  B  explores  L 
and  produces  an  exact  copy  l/  of  it,  placing  L'  in  exactly  the  same 
position  with  respect  to  the  secondary  that  L  is  in  with  respect  to 
the  primary  A.  The  information  necessary  for  this  positioning  can 
be  obtained  by  the  investigation  of  L,  since  the  latter  contains  the 
numbers  #1,3/1,  a,  0,  which  describe  the  position  of  the  secondary 
in  question  with  respect  to  the  primary  A. 

Consider  finally  an  automaton  C  which  controls  the  two  previously 
mentioned  automata  A  and  B  as  follows:  C  first  causes  A,  as  primary, 
to  build  the  secondary  S  described  by  L.  C  then  causes  B  to  make  a 
copy  L'  of  L  and  to  attach  it  to  the  secondary  S  as  described  above. 
Now  designate  the  total  aggregate  of  all  three  automata  A,  B,  C  by  D. 

Designate  the  description  L  of  this  automaton  D  by  LD  .  Note  that 
LD  must  contain  the  numbers  X\  ,  ij\  (indirectly,  by  way  of  e,  77, 
|#i|,  |?/i|;  cf.  formula  (*)  in  Sec.  1.5.2),  a,  j8,  which  describe  the  posi- 
tioning of  the  desired  secondary  with  respect  to  the  primary.  There 
need  be  no  doubt  about  the  values  of  a,  /3  that  are  to  be  used  here, 
since  one  can  ascertain  how  large  a  rectangle  is  needed  to  cover  D. 
With  respect  to  x\ ,  y\  ,  however,  there  is  a  real  choice;  these  two 
coordinates  define  the  relative  position  of  the  desired  secondary  with 
respect  to  the  primary.  Let  us  assume  first  that  this  choice  will  be 
made  in  some  definite  manner;  it  need  only  guarantee  that  the  second- 
ary and  its  attachment  L'  will  lie  wholly  outside  the  primary  and 
its  attachment  L.  Later  on  we  will  have  somewhat  more  to  say  about 
this. 

Now  consider  the  complex  E  which  results  from  attaching  LD  to 
D.  By  going  over  the  description  given  above,  it  is  easily  verified 
that  E  will  construct  precisely  D  with  LD  ,  displaced  as  above.  Thus 
E  is  self -reproducing. 

This  answers  the  first  question  of  (D ) .  The  second  question  of  (D ) 
can  now  also  be  answered  along  the  same  lines.  Indeed,  assume  that 
in  addition  to  self -reproduction,  the  construction  of  a  further  autom- 
aton F  is  also  wanted.  In  this  case,  form  the  L  which  describes  D 
followed  by  F:  LD+F  .  Now  consider  the  complex  EF  which  results 
from  attaching  LD+F  to  D.  It  is  clear  that  this  will  construct  D,  at- 
tach LD+F  to  it,  and  also  construct  F.  In  other  words,  it  self -reproduces 
and  constructs  F  in  addition. 

The  following  remarks  serve  to  clarify  somewhat  further  the  nature 
of  the  procedure  outlined  for  (D ) . 

1.6.2.1  First  remark:  shape  o/L.  The  construction  of  an  automaton 
was  based  on  generating  separately  every  correct  state  of  every  cell 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


in  a  suitable  covering  area  {cf.  Sec.  1.5.2  (b),  where  this  modus 
procedendi  is  indicated}.  The  covering  area  is  conceived  in  a  sim- 
plified, and  therefore  presumably  often  overextended,  form  as  a 
rectangle  {cf.  Sec.  1.5.2  (a)}.  The  external  attachment  L  is  a  linear 
array  (cf.  the  last  part  of  Sec.  1.5.2).  These  two  geometrical  shapes 
will  not  always  fit  together  perfectly:  covering  them  simultaneously 
by  a  rectangle  may  force  an  inelegant  overextension  of  the  latter.  It 
should  be  pointed  out  that  there  is  nothing  immutable  about  the 
linear  shape  of  L,  and  that  one  might  well  decide  to  change  it  (cf. 
later).  On  the  other  hand,  the  linear  shape  has  the  virtue  of  easy 
overall  accessibility  (cf.  later  [Ch.  4]). 

1 .6.2.2  Second  remark:  avoidance  of  collision  in  a  single  reproduction. 
As  pointed  out  toward  the  end  of  Section  1.6.1.2,  xi ,  yi  must  be  so 
large  that  the  secondary  (whose  position  relative  to  the  primary  is 
defined  by  the  coordinates  Xi  ,  yi)  and  its  attachment  L'  will  lie 
wholly  outside  the  primary  and  its  attachment  L.  Hence  they  are 
affected  by  the  size  of  L.  (L,'  is  congruent  to  L.)  This  creates  the 
danger  of  a  vicious  circle,  since  L  contains  \yi\. 

However,  this  danger  is  not  serious,  and  any  one  of  the  following 
procedures  will  obviate  it. 

L  (both  for  the  primary  L  itself  and  for  the  secondary  L,')  extends 
in  one  direction  only  (the  positive  x-direction;  cf.  the  end  of  Sec. 
1.5.2),  which  implies  that  it  is  quite  thin  in  the  ^/-directions  (especially 
if  it  is  linear;  cf.  above  and  also  later).  Therefore,  a  fixed  minimum 
value  for  \yi\  can  be  assigned,  which  guarantees  that  neither  D  nor 
L  of  the  primary  and  of  the  secondary  collide,  by  virtue  of  their 
separation  in  the  ^/-direction. 

Alternatively,  a  base  k  notation  for  |#i|,  \yi\  (cf.  Sees.  1.4.1.2  and 
1.4.2.1 )  guarantees  that  the  area  used  for  their  designation,  and  there- 
fore L  also,  increases  only  as  the  2log  of  these  numbers  (cf.  Sec. 
1.4.2.4),  whereas  the  separation  that  they  provide  is  essentially  that 
of  their  own  size.  Clearly  for  sufficiently  large  numbers  these  will 
overtake  their  own  2log  to  any  desired  degree. 

Finally,  if  each  number  is  to  be  designated,  as  alternatively  sug- 
gested in  Section  1.4.2.4,  by  a  sequence  of  as  many  ones  as  it  expresses, 
we  can  still  avoid  any  difficulty  by,  for  example,  agreeing  that  \xi\, 
\yi\  are  to  be  squares  of  integers  and  that  the  numbers  to  be  desig- 
nated by  the  means  indicated  above  will  be  their  square  roots.  Thus 
the  required  size  of  L  will  go  with  the  square  root  of  the  separation 
provided,  which  is,  like  the  2log,  a  slowly  increasing  function,  sure 
to  be  adequately  overtaken  when  the  numbers  get  sufficiently  large. 

As  mentioned  above,  any  one  of  these  three  devices  is  workable, 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




and  they  are  not  the  only  ones.  The  actual  procedure  will  be  devel- 
oped later. 

1.6 .2.3  Third  remark:  analysis  of  the  method  for  overcoming  the 
difficulty  of  Section  1.6.1.1 — the  role  of  L.  It  is  worth  recapitulating 
how  the  a  priori  argument  against  the  possibility  of  self-reproduction, 
as  stated  in  Section  1.6.1.1,  was  overcome  in  Section  1.6.1.2. 

The  essential  step  was  that  D  contained  a  sub-assembly  B  which  is 
able  to  copy  (and  re-position)  any  linear  array  L.  B  is  a  fixed  entity, 
of  fixed,  finite  size,  and  it  is  yet  able  to  copy  an  L  of  any  size.  It  is 
essentially  this  step  of  "copying"  which  transcends  the  otherwise 
seemingly  valid  rule  of  the  primary's  necessary  superiority  (in  size, 
also  in  organization)  over  the  secondary. 

Now  L  =  LG  is  the  description  of  the  secondary  G  that  is  to  be 
constructed,  as  discussed  in  Section  1.5.2.  (In  our  actual  applications 
in  Sec.  1.6.1.2,  D  and  D  +  F  played  the  role  of  G.)  One  might  ask 
why  the  description  LG  is  preferable  to  the  original  G  in  controlling 
the  copying  device  B.  In  other  words,  why  can  B  not  copy  directly 
G  itself,  i.e.,  why  must  the  intermediary  LG  be  introduced?  This 
question  is  clearly  of  considerable  semantic  importance  for  the  area 
in  which  we  are  now  working,  i.e.,  for  a  theory  of  automata.  Indeed, 
it  touches  at  the  base  of  the  entire  question  of  notations  and  represen- 
tations, i.e.,  of  the  significance  and  advantages  of  introducing  "de- 
scriptions" in  addition  to  the  original  objects. 

The  reason  is  this.  In  order  to  copy  a  group  of  cells  according  to 
the  ideas  of  Section  1.6.1.2  concerning  B,  it  is  necessary  to  "explore" 
that  group  to  ascertain  the  state  of  each  one  of  its  cells  and  to  induce 
the  same  state  in  the  corresponding  cell  in  the  area  where  the  copy 
is  to  be  placed.  This  exploration  implies,  of  course,  affecting  each  cell 
of  this  group  successively  with  suitable  stimuli  and  observing  the 
reactions.  This  is  clearly  the  way  in  which  the  copying  automaton  B 
can  be  expected  to  operate,  i.e.,  to  take  the  appropriate  actions  on 
the  basis  of  what  is  found  in  each  case.  If  the  object  under  observa- 
tion consists  of  "quasi-quiescent"  cells  (cf.  the  remarks  made  on  this 
subject  in  Sec.  1.4.2.1),  then  these  stimulations  can  be  so  arranged 
as  to  produce  the  reactions  that  B  needs  for  its  diagnostic  purposes, 
but  no  reactions  that  will  affect  other  parts  of  the  area  which  has  to 
be  explored.  If  an  assembly  G,  which  may  itself  be  an  active 
automaton,  were  to  be  investigated  by  such  methods,  one  would  have 
to  expect  trouble.  The  stimulations  conveyed  to  it,  as  discussed  above, 
for  "diagnostic"  purposes,  might  actually  stimulate  various  parts  of 
G  in  such  a  manner  that  other  regions  could  also  get  involved,  i.e., 
have  the  states  of  their  cells  altered.  Thus  G  would  be  disturbed; 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


it  could  change  in  ways  that  are  difficult  to  foresee,  and,  in  any  case, 
likely  to  be  incompatible  with  the  purpose  of  observation;  indeed, 
observing  and  copying  presuppose  an  unchanging  original.  The 
virtue  of  LG  (as  compared  to  G)  is  that,  since  it  consists  of  quasi- 
quiescent  cells,  no  such  complications  (i.e.,  no  spreading  of  the  diag- 
nostic stimulations)  need  be  expected.  (For  the  details  of  all  this, 
cf.  later  [Ch.  4].) 

The  above  requires  one  more  qualification.  Our  choice  actually  did 
not  lie  between  the  copying  of  G  and  the  copying  of  LG  .  It  was  rather 
the  copying  of  G  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  copying  of  LG  ,  combined 
with  the  construction  of  G  from  its  description  LG  ,  on  the  other 
hand.  The  last  step  in  the  second  procedure,  however,  is  feasible, 
since  this  is  precisely  what  the  universal  constructing  automaton  in 
the  sense  of  question  (C)  will  do,  according  to  Section  1.5.2.  Note 
also  that  the  quasi-quiescent  character  of  L  =  LG  is  important  in 
this  construction  step  too;  in  fact,  the  observations  of  Section  1.4.2.1 
concerning  quasi -quiescence  in  L  were  aimed  directly  at  this  applica- 
tion. 

1.6.3.1  Copying:  use  of  descriptions  vs.  originals.  It  is  worthwhile 
to  observe  at  this  point,  too,  why  a  third  step,  namely  the  construc- 
tion of  LG  ,  based  on  a  direct  exploration  of  the  original  G,  cannot  be 
carried  out  with  these  methods.  Note  that  if  this  could  be  done,  then  a 
suitable  primary  automaton  could  copy  a  given  automaton  G  with- 
out ever  having  been  furnished  with  its  description  LG  .  Indeed,  one 
would  begin  with  the  step  mentioned  above,  the  construction  of  LG 
from  G,  and  then  proceed  with  the  two  steps  mentioned  previously, 
the  copying  of  LG  and  the  construction  of  G  from  LG  .  The  difficulty 
is  that  the  two  last  mentioned  steps  require  only  the  observation  of 
the  quasi-quiescent  LG  ,  while  the  first  mentioned  step  would  also 
call  for  the  observation  of  the  uncontrollably  reactive  G.  If  one 
considers  the  existing  studies  concerning  the  relationship  of  automata 
and  logics,  it  appears  very  likely  that  any  procedure  for  the  direct 
copying  of  a  given  automaton  G,  without  the  possession  of  a  descrip- 
tion LG  ,  will  fail;  otherwise  one  would  probably  get  involved  in 
logical  antinomies  of  the  Richard  type.27 

To  sum  up,  the  reason  to  operate  with  "descriptions"  LG  instead  of 
the  "originals"  G  is  that  the  former  are  quasi-quiescent  (i.e.,  un- 
changing, not  in  an  absolute  sense,  but  for  the  purposes  of  the  ex- 
ploration that  has  to  be  undertaken),  while  the  latter  are  live  and 
reactive.  In  the  situation  in  which  we  are  finding  ourselves  here,  the 

27  [Von  Neumann  indicated  that  he  was  going  to  make  a  footnote  reference 
to  Turing  at  this  point.  See  Sec.  1.6.3.2  below.] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




importance  of  descriptions  is  that  they  replace  the  varying  and  reac- 
tive originals  by  quiescent  and  (temporarily)  unchanging  semantic 
equivalents  and  thus  permit  copying.  Copying,  as  we  have  seen 
above,  is  the  decisive  step  which  renders  self -reproduction  (or,  more 
generally,  reproduction  without  degeneration  in  size  or  level  of 
organization)  possible. 

[  1 .6.3.2  The  Richard  paradox  and  Turing  machines.  As  indicated 
above,  von  Neumann  was  going  to  make  a  footnote  reference  to 
Turing  in  connection  with  the  Richard  paradox.  I  do  not  know  what 
he  had  in  mind,  but  I  think  it  likely  that  he  was  going  to  mention 
the  parallelism  between  Richard 's  paradox28  and  Turing's  proof  of 
the  undecidability  of  the  halting  problem.  In  any  case,  this  paral- 
lelism is  illuminating  in  the  present  context. 

Richard's  paradox  may  be  generated  in  a  suitable  language  <£  as 
follows.  Let  6o,6i,62,  •  •  •  be  an  enumeration  of  all  the  expressions  of 
£  which  define  two-valued  number-theoretic  functions  of  one  varia- 
ble, that  is,  functions  from  the  natural  numbers  to  the  two  values 
zero  and  one.  The  expression  "x  is  odd"  is  such  an  expression;  it 
defines  a  function  which  is  true  (has  the  value  1 )  for  odd  numbers 
and  is  false  (has  the  value  0)  for  even  numbers.  Let  fi(n)  be  the 
number-theoretic  function  denned  by     ,  and  define  —fi(n)  by 

-/<(n)  =  0if/<(n)  =  1 
-fdn)  =  1  if/«(n)  =  0. 

Finally,  let  e  be  the  expression  "the  function  —fn(n)." 

We  assume  that  e  is  expressible  in  «£,  and  derive  a  contradiction. 
(1)  The  enumeration  e0 ,  &i ,  ,  •  •  •  contains  all  the  expressions  of  £ 
which  define  two-valued  number-theoretic  functions  of  one  variable. 
Expression  e  clearly  defines  a  two-valued  number-theoretic  function 
of  one  variable.  Therefore  expression  e  is  in  the  enumeration  e0 , 
ei  ,  e2 ,  •  •  •  .  (2)  But  e  is  an  explicit  definition  of  the  function  —  fn  (n), 
which  differs  from  every  function  in  the  enumeration  fo(n),  fi(n), 
/2(n),  •  •  •  .  Therefore  e  does  not  define  any  of  the  functions  /o(w), 
fi(n),  •  •  •  .  For  each  i,  fi(n)  is  defined  by     .  Consequently, 

e  is  not  in  the  enumeration  e0  ,  #i ,  62  ,  •  •  •  . 

Thus  we  have  shown  both  that  the  expression  e  is  in  the  enumera- 
tion 60 ,  61  ,  62 ,  •  •  •  and  that  it  is  not  in  this  enumeration.  The  appear- 
ance of  this  contradiction  is  surprising,  because  it  would  seem  that 
expression  e  is  a  legitimate  expression  in  a  consistent  language, 
namely,  the  English  language  enriched  with  some  mathematical 

28  [Richard,  "Les  principes  des  mathematiques  et  le  probleme  des  ensem- 
bles. "  See  also  Kleene,  Introduction  to  Metamathematics ,  pp.  38,  341.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


symbols.  Actually,  the  contradiction  shows  that  if  a  language  £  is 
consistent  then  e  cannot  be  expressed  in  it. 

Let  us  turn  next  to  the  halting  problem  for  Turing  machines.  This 
problem  was  explained  at  the  end  of  the  Second  Lecture  of  Part  I 
above.  A  Turing  machine  is  a  finite  automaton  with  an  indefinitely 
extendible  tape.  A  "concrete  Turing  machine,,  is  a  Turing  machine 
which  has  a  finite  "program"  or  problem  statement  on  its  tape  ini- 
tially. A  concrete  Turing  machine  is  said  to  be  "circular"  if  it  prints 
a  finite  sequence  of  binary  digits  and  halts,  while  it  is  said  to  be 
"circle-free"  if  it  continues  to  print  binary  digits  in  alternate  squares 
forever.  Turing  proved  that  there  is  no  decision  machine  for  halting, 
that  is,  no  abstract  Turing  machine  which  can  decide  whether  an 
arbitrary  concrete  Turing  machine  is  circular  (will  halt  sometime) 
or  circle-free. 

Turing's  proof  that  there  is  no  decision  machine  for  halting  may 
be  put  in  a  form  which  closely  parallels  the  preceding  proof  concern- 
ing Richard's  paradox.  Let  fa ,  fa ,  fa ,  •  •  *  ,  U ,  •  •  •  be  an  enumeration 
of  all  the  circle-free  concrete  Turing  machines.  Let  s*(0),  s»(l), 
Si (2),  •••  ,  Si(n),  •••  be  the  sequence  computed  by  machine  fa  . 
Each  Si(n)  is  either  zero  or  one,  so  machine  fa  computes  the  two- 
valued  function  st-(n)  in  the  sense  of  enumerating  its  values  in  their 
natural  order.  Now  consider  the  function  —  sn(n).  This  function  is 
analogous  to  the  function  —fn(n)  defined  by  expression  e  in  the 
Richard  paradox. 

To  continue  the  parallelism,  we  assume  that  there  is  a  circle-free 
concrete  Turing  machine  t'  which  computes  the  function  —  sn(n) 
and  derive  a  contradiction.  (1)  The  enumeration  to ,  fa ,  fa  ,  •  •  •  con- 
tains all  circle-free  concrete  Turing  machines.  Machine  t'  is  by  hy- 
pothesis a  circle-free  concrete  Turing  machine.  Consequently,  machine 
t'  is  in  the  enumeration  to ,  fa  ,  fa ,  •  •  •  .  (2)  By  definition,  {  computes 
the  function  —sn(n),  which  clearly  differs  from  every  function  in 
the  enumeration  So(ft),  Si(ft),  s2(n),  •••  .  For  each  i,  the  function 
s»  (n)  is  computed  by  the  machine  fa  .  Consequently,  machine  t'  is 
not  in  the  enumeration  fa  ,  fa ,  fa  ,  *  •  •  . 

Thus  we  have  shown  both  that  machine  {  is  in  the  enumeration 
U ,  t\ ,  fa  ' ' '  and  that  it  is  not.  The  appearance  of  this  contradiction 
is  not  surprising,  however,  for  we  had  no  reason  to  believe  that 
machine  t'  exists.  In  other  words,  the  contradiction  shows  that  ma- 
chine {  does  not  exist,  and  hence  that  the  function  —  s„(ft)  is  not 
computed  by  any  circle-free  concrete  Turing  machine. 

We  assume  next  that  there  is  a  decision  machine  th  for  halting,  and 
derive  a  contradiction.  There  is  a  concrete  Turing  machine  which 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 


can  enumerate  all  the  concrete  Turing  machines;  call  it  t\  The  output 
of  te  can  be  fed  into  th  to  produce  a  machine  te  +  th  which  enumerates 
all  the  circle-free  concrete  Turing  machines.  There  is  an  abstract 
Turing  machine  tu  which  can  simulate  each  circle-free  concrete 
machine  in  turn,  find  sn(n)  for  each  machine  n,  and  print  —  sn(n). 
Thus  the  machine  f  +  th  +  tu  computes  the  function  —  sn(n),  and 
is  the  machine  t .  But  we  know  from  the  preceding  paragraph  that 
machine  t'  does  not  exist.  Machines  f  and  tu  do  exist.  Therefore, 
machine  th  does  not  exist.  That  is,  there  is  no  decision  machine  for 
halting.  It  follows  also  that  machine  f  +  th  does  not  exist,  i.e.,  there 
is  no  machine  which  enumerates  all  the  circle-free  concrete  Turing 
machines. 

The  first  part  of  the  preceding  proof  that  there  is  no  decision  ma- 
chine for  halting  establishes  both  that  machine  {  is  in  the  enumeration 
to ,  h  ,  h  ,  *  *  *  and  that  it  is  not.  This  closely  parallels  the  earlier 
proof,  given  in  connection  with  Richard's  paradox,  that  the  expres- 
sion e  is  in  the  enumeration  e0 ,  #i  ,  e2 ,  •  •  •  and  that  it  is  not.  Both 
use  Cantor's  diagonal  procedure  to  define  a  function  which  is  not 
in  a  given  enumeration.  I  suspect  that  it  was  because  of  this  paral- 
lelism that  von  Neumann  was  going  to  refer  to  Turing  at  this  point. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  Richard  paradox  can  be  barred  from  a 
language  by  imposing  a  "theory  of  types"  on  that  language.29  For 
example,  we  can  design  the  language  so  that  every  expression  of  the 
language  has  a  type  number,  and  so  that  an  expression  of  given  type 
can  refer  only  to  expressions  of  lower  type.  Suppose  now  that  the 
expressions  e0 ,  #i  ,  e2 ,  •  •  •  are  of  type  m.  Since  expression  e  refers 
to  all  these  expressions,  it  must  be  of  higher  type,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  in  the  list  e0 ,  e\  ,  e2 ,  *  •  •  .  This  being  so,  our  earlier  deriva- 
tion of  Richard's  paradox  fails.  See  in  this  connection  the  letter 
from  Kurt  Godel  quoted  at  the  end  of  the  Second  Lecture  of  Part  I 
above. 

These  considerations  about  self -reference  are  relevant  to  the  prob- 
lem of  designing  a  self -reproducing  automaton,  since  such  an  autom- 
aton must  be  able  to  obtain  a  description  of  itself.  In  Section  1.6.3.1 
(entitled  "Copying:  use  of  descriptions  vs.  originals")  von  Neumann 
considers  two  methods  for  accomplishing  this,  which  I  will  call  the 
"passive"  and  "active"  methods.  In  the  passive  method  the  self- 
reproducing  automaton  contains  within  itself  a  passive  description 
of  itself  and  reads  this  description  in  such  a  way  that  the  description 

29  [Russell,  ' 'Mathematical  Logic  as  Based  on  the  Theory  of  Types."  See 
also  Kleene,  Introduction  to  Metamathematics ,  pp.  44-46.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


cannot  interfere  with  the  automaton's  operations.  In  the  active 
method  the  self-reproducing  automaton  examines  itself  and  thereby 
constructs  a  description  of  itself.  Von  Neumann  suggests  that  this 
second  method  would  probably  lead  to  paradoxes  of  the  Richard 
type,  and  for  this  reason  he  adopts  the  first  method.  See  also  Sections 
1.7.2.1,  2.3.3,  2.6.1,  and  2.8.2  below.  We  will  see  by  the  end  of  Chapter 
5  below  that  a  self -reproducing  machine  can  indeed  be  constructed 
by  means  of  the  first  method.  This  shows  that  it  is  possible  for  an 
automaton  to  contain  a  description  of  itself.]30 

1.7  Various  Problems  of  External  Construction  Intermediate 
Between  Questions  (D)  and  (E) 

1.7.1  Positioning  of  primary,  secondary,  ternary,  etc.  We  pass  now 
to  an  extension  of  question  (D)  which  points  the  way  towards 
question  (E).  This  deals  with  the  question  of  positioning  the  second- 
ary that  the  self -reproducing  primary  E  or  EF  constructs,  and  the 
initiation,  timing,  and  repetitions  of  the  act  of  self-reproduction. 

Note  that  the  positioning  of  F  for  EF  need  not  create  any  new  prob- 
lems: EF  is  D  with  LD+F  attached  (cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  1.6.1.2)  and 
LD+F  is  a  description  of  D  followed  by  a  description  of  F.  In  this 
joint  description  of  D  with  F  the  latter  must  be  unambiguously  posi- 
tioned with  respect  to  the  former,  and  this  takes  care  of  what  is 
needed  in  this  respect. 

Returning  to  the  main  question  of  positioning  the  secondary  by  E 
or  EF  ,  we  can  argue  as  follows.  Assume  that  this  positioning  is  done 
by  the  first  method  of  Section  1.6.2.2,  i.e.,  by  choosing  a  y  such  that 
I  Vi  |  ^  y  guarantees  the  separateness  of  the  primary  and  the  second- 
ary E  or  EF  .  (In  the  case  of  EF  we  think  of  both  primary  and  second- 
ary as  provided  with  an  F  positioned  according  to  LD+F  relatively 
to  D;  cf.  above,  although  at  the  beginning  of  the  process  only  the 
secondary  need  be  accompanied  by  such  an  F.)  Let  the  origin  of  the 
x,  ^/-coordinate  system  referred  to  in  Section  1.5.2  lie  in  the 
extreme  lower  left  corner  of  the  rectangle  covering  the  primary, 
i.e.,  at  the  point  that  corresponds  to  the  one  designated  by  Xi  ,  yi 
in  the  secondary.  Thus  the  secondary  is  translated  by  xx  ,  yi  against 
the  primary. 

Since  the  secondary  is  otherwise  identical  with  the  primary  (except 
for  the  addition  of  F  in  the  second  case),  it  will  again  reproduce  (and 
produce  another  F  in  the  second  case),  constructing  a  ternary.  This 

30  [There  is  an  interesting  parallel  between  Godel's  undecidable  formula 
(see  p.  55  above),  which  refers  to  itself,  and  von  Neumann's  self -reproducing 
automaton,  which  contains  a  description  of  itself.  See  Burks,  "Computation, 
Behavior,  and  Structure  in  Fixed  and  Growing  Automata/'  pp.  19-21.] 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




will  then  produce  a  quaternary,  followed  by  a  quinary  (each  with 
its  concomitant  F  in  the  second  case;  cf.  above),  etc.  The  shifts 
involved  will  be  2xi  ,  2yi  ,  then  Sxi  ,  Syi  ,  then  4xi  ,  4?/i  ,  etc. 

Thus  the  shift  between  the  p-ary  and  the  g-ary  is  (q  —  p)x\  , 
(q  —  p)yi  .  Since  p,  q  =  1,2,  •  •  •  ,  therefore  p  9^  q  implies 

|  q  -  p  |  =  1,  2,  •  , 

and  hence  |  (q  —  p)yx  \  =  \  q  —  p  \  • 1  yi  |  ^  y.  Hence,  in  view  of  our 
above  observation  relating  to  Section  1.5.2,  these  two  will  not 
intersect.  That  is,  all  the  successively  constructed  descendants  of 
the  primary  will  be  distinct  and  non-interfering  entities  in  space. 
(To  be  more  precise,  these  descendants  will  be  distinct  and  non- 
interfering  entities  in  the  underlying  crystal  [crystalline  structure].) 

Actually,  this  program  of  mutual  avoidance  among  the  primary  and 
its  descendants  must  be  extended  to  the  paths  within  the  crystal 
through  which  each  one  of  these  entities,  acting  as  a  primary  for 
its  own  reproduction,  connects  with  the  site  and  operates  on  the 
construction  of  its  immediate  successor  in  the  line  of  descent,  i.e., 
its  secondary. 

This,  however,  presents  no  difficulties,  and  will  be  gone  into  in 
the  course  of  the  detailed  discussion. 

1.7.2.1  Constructed  automata:  initial  state  and  starting  stimulus. 
The  next  point  to  be  gone  into  is  that  of  initiation  and  timing. 

Consider  the  state  of  the  secondary  automaton  which  the  con- 
struction is  designed  to  achieve,  i.e.,  its  so-called  initial  state  {cf. 
Sec.  1.5.2  immediately  after  formula  (*)}.  In  all  states  that  lead  up 
to  this,  and  therefore  conveniently  in  this  state  too,  the  automaton 
must  be  quasi-quiescent.  This  is  clearly  necessary  for  an  orderly 
process  of  construction,  since  the  already-constructed  parts  of  the 
not  yet  completed  secondary  must  not  be  reactive  and  changing, 
while  the  construction — in  adjacent  as  well  as  in  other  areas — is 
still  in  progress. 

The  problem  that  is  encountered  here  is  not  unlike  the  one  dis- 
cussed in  Section  1.6.2.3  relative  to  the  quasi-quiescence  of  L.  How- 
ever, it  is  less  severe  here.  The  stimuli  that  have  to  be  used  in  ex- 
ploring L  must  be  able  to  induce  responses  in  the  primary,  if  they 
are  to  perform  their  function  of  inducing  there  appropriate  actions 
that  depend  on  the  information  acquired  in  inspecting  L.  (This  is 
quite  essential  to  the  proper  functioning  of  the  primary,  as  was  seen 
in  the  discussion  of  the  operation  of  constructing  under  the  control 
of  instructions  in  Sec.  1.4.2.1,  and  again  in  the  discussion  of  the 
operation  of  copying  in  Sec.  1.6.2.3  and  in  Sec.  1.6.3.)  On  the  other 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


hand,  the  stimuli  that  create  the  desired  cell  states  during  the  con- 
struction of  the  secondary  need  not  have  such  effects  on  the  class 
of  automata  that  is  involved  here,  secondary  or  primary.  This  will  be 
verified  in  detail  later.  Thus  it  was  necessary  to  keep  the  "descrip- 
tions" L  of  automata  sharply  apart  from  the  "originals"  (cf.  Sec. 
1.6.3.1),  while  it  will  be  possible  to  construct  the  automata  which  are 
relevant  here  so  that  they  have  quasi-quiescent  initial  states.  For  the 
details  and  precise  definitions,  cf.  later. 

The  crux  of  this  matter  is,  of  course,  that  once  such  a  (secondary) 
automaton  is  completed,  and  hence  present  in  its  quasi-quiescent 
initial  state,  it  can  then  be  transferred  by  some  appropriate  process 
of  stimulation  into  its  normal  (i.e.,  intended)  mode  of  activity. 
This  process  of  stimulation  is  most  conveniently  thought  of  as  a 
single  stimulus,  delivered  to  the  appropriate  point  of  the  secondary, 
at  the  appropriate  time  after  completion,  by  the  primary.  This  is 
the  secondary's  starting  stimulus.  This  is,  then,  the  concluding  step 
of  the  primary  in  its  construction  of  the  secondary.  For  the  details, 
cf.  later. 

In  the  case  of  self-reproduction,  i.e.,  for  the  E  or  EF  discussed 
in  Sections  1.6.1.2  and  1.7.1,  the  secondary  (or  one  of  the  secondaries) 
is  a  shifted  copy  of  the  primary.  The  starting  stimulus  activates  this 
secondary  and  makes  it  self -reproducing  (as  the  primary  had  been 
originally).  This,  then,  maintains  the  iterative  process  of  self-re- 
production  with  which  Section  1.7.1  dealt. 

1.7.2.2  Single-action  vs.  sequential  self -reproduction.  For  the  self- 
reproducing  primary  (E  or  EF  ;  cf.  above)  the  next  question  is  this: 
What  does  the  primary  do  after  it  has  completed  the  secondary 
and  given  it  the  starting  stimulus? 

The  simplest  arrangement  would  be  to  let  it  return  to  a  quasi- 
quiescent  state  which  is  identical  with  its  original  state.  Implicitly 
this  is  the  assumption  which  fits  discussions  like  the  one  of  continued 
reproduction  in  Section  1.7.1. 

An  alternative  possibility  is  to  finish  with  the  quasi-quiescent 
state,  plus  activity  in  a  suitable  terminal  organ  which  imparts  the 
starting  stimulus  again.  This  scheme  leads  to  repeated  self-reproduc- 
tions by  the  original  primary,  and  of  course  similarly  by  all  its 
descendants  in  the  first,  second,  third,  etc.  degree.  However,  it  is 
not  operable  without  one  more  elaboration. 

Indeed,  as  it  stands  it  would  cause  the  primary  to  try  to  form  all 
successive  secondaries  with  the  same  Xi ,  iji  ,  i.e.,  at  the  same  location 
in  the  crystal.  This  is  obviously  conflicting;  at  best  the  second  con- 
struction of  a  secondary  would  override  and  destroy  the  first  speci- 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




men.  However,  it  is  even  more  likely  that  the  first  secondary,  which 
by  then  is  reactive,  will  interfere  with  the  second  (attempted) 
construction,  causing  an  unforeseeable  class  of  malfunctions  and 
corrupting  all  reproduction.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  change 
Xi  ,  2/1  between  the  first  and  the  second  attempt  to  construct  a  second- 
ary, and  similarly  between  the  second  and  the  third  one,  the  third 
and  the  fourth  one,  etc.,  etc.  This  changing  of  X\  ,  yi  must  therefore 
take  place  during  (i.e.,  as  a  part  of)  the  activity  of  the  terminal 
organ  referred  to  above.  The  arithmetical  rules  that  control  these 
successive  modifications  of  x\  ,  yi  must  be  such  that  the  whole  se- 
quence of  secondaries  of  the  original  primary  do  not  conflict  with 
each  other,  nor  with  the  possible  F  which  accompany  them  (cf. 
the  first  part  of  Sec.  1.7.1),  nor  with  the  paths  which  are  required 
for  their  construction  (cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  1.7.1).  In  addition,  every 
secondary  of  the  original  primary,  since  it  is  a  shifted  copy  of  the 
latter,  will  behave  in  the  same  way.  Thus  a  double  sequence  of 
ternaries  will  be  constructed  from  these,  then  by  the  same  mechanisms 
a  triple  sequence  of  quaternaries,  then  a  quadruple  sequence  of 
quinaries,  etc.,  etc.  The  rules  for  the  successive  modifications  of  the 
Xi  ,  y\  must  hence  be  such  that  no  two  in  all  the  orders  of  this  hier- 
archy ever  interfere  with  each  other,  or  with  each  other's  possible  F, 
or  with  each  other's  construction  paths. 

This  requirement  sounds  complicated,  but  it  is  not  particularly 
difficult  to  implement  by  suitable  arithmetical  rules  concerning  the 
formation  of  the  successive  X\ ,  yi  .  This  will  be  discussed  later. 

The  above  discussion  thus  distinguishes  between  two  types  of  self- 
reproduction :  first,  when  each  primary  constructs  only  one  second- 
ary, and  second,  when  each  primary  keeps  constructing  secondaries 
sequentially  without  ever  stopping.  We  will  designate  these  as  the 
single-action  and  the  sequential  type  of  self -reproduction,  respectively. 

1.7.3  Construction,  position,  conflict.  Some  remarks  about  physio- 
logical analogs  of  the  above  constructions  are  now  in  order. 

Comparing  these  processes  of  construction  and  reproduction  of 
automata,  and  those  of  actual  growth  and  reproduction  in  nature, 
this  difference  is  conspicuous;  in  our  case  the  site  plays  a  more  criti- 
cal role  than  it  does  in  reality.  The  reason  is  that  by  passing  from 
continuous,  Euclidean  space  to  a  discrete  crystal,  we  have  purposely 
bypassed  as  much  as  possible  of  kinematics.  Hence  the  moving 
around  of  a  structure  which  remains  congruent  to  itself,  but  changes 
its  position  with  respect  to  the  crystal  lattice,  is  no  longer  the  simple 
and  elementary  operation  it  is  in  nature.  In  our  case,  it  would  be 
about  as  complex  as  genuine  reproduction.  This  means  that  all 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


of  our  structures  are  rather  rigidly  tied  to  their  original  location,  and 
all  conflicts  and  collisions  between  them  are  primarily  conflicts  in 
location. 

It  is  true  in  the  natural  setting,  too,  that  conflicts  and  collisions 
are  due  in  the  same  way  to  location,  but  there  the  scheme  has  more 
elasticity  because  of  the  possibility  of  motion.  The  limitations  of  the 
pattern  due  to  this  circumstance  are  obviously  the  price  one  has  to 
pay  for  the  simplicity  obtained  by  our  elimination  of  kinematics  (cf . 
the  discussions  of  Sees.  1.3.1.1-1.3.3.1). 

An  essential  preliminary  condition  for  the  mechanisms  of  repro- 
duction that  we  have  considered  is  the  quiescence  of  the  area  in 
which  they  are  to  function  (cf.,  e.g.,  the  remarks  in  the  first  part  of 
Sec.  1.7.2.1  and  in  the  first  part  of  Sec.  1.7.2.2).  That  is,  the  region 
of  the  crystal  surrounding  the  primary  must  be  free  of  all  reactive 
organisms,  and  this  must  be  true  as  far  as  the  process  of  reproduction 
is  expected  to  progress  unhindered.  It  is  quite  clear  that  where  the 
reproductive  expansion  of  the  area  under  the  influence  of  the  primary 
collides  with  other  reactive  organisms,  the  "unforeseeable  malfunc- 
tions" referred  to  in  Section  1.7.2.2  can  set  in.  This  is,  of  course, 
just  another  way  to  refer  to  the  conflict  situations  involving  several 
independent  organisms  that  have  come  into  contact  and  interaction. 

1.7.4.1  EF  and  the  gene-function.  Another  physiological  analog 
worth  pointing  out  is  the  similarity  of  the  behavior  of  automata  of 
the  EF  type  with  the  typical  gene  function.31  Indeed,  EF  reproduces 
itself  and  also  produces  a  prescribed  F.  The  gene  reproduces  itself 
and  also  produces — or  stimulates  the  production  of — certain  specific 
enzymes. 

1.1 ' .1+.2  EF  and  the  mutation — types  of  mutation.  A  further  property 
of  EF  that  may  be  commented  on  is  this.  Assume  that  a  cell  of  EF 
is  arbitrarily  changed.  If  this  cell  lies  in  the  D-region  of  EF  ,  it  may 
inhibit  or  completely  misdirect  the  process  of  reproduction.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  lies  in  the  LD+F  region  of  EF  ,  then  EF  will  construct 
a  secondary,  but  this  may  not  be  related  to  it  (and  to  F)  in  the  de- 
sired manner.  If,  finally,  the  altered  cell  lies  in  the  LD+F  region,  and 
more  particularly  in  the  description  of  F  within  it,  modifying  F  into, 
say  F',  then  the  production  of  EF>  will  take  place,  and  in  addition 
to  it  an  F'  will  be  produced. 

Such  a  change  of  a  cell  within  EF  is  rather  reminiscent  of  a  mutation 
in  nature.  The  first  case  would  seem  to  have  the  essential  traits  of  a 
lethal  or  sterilizing  mutation.  The  second  corresponds  to  one  without 

31  Von  Neumann,  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata."  Col- 
lected Works  5.317-318. 


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS 




these  traits,  but  producing  an  essentially  modified,  presumably 
sterile,  successor.  The  third  one  produces  a  successor  which  is  viable 
and  self-reproducing  like  the  original  but  has  a  different  by-product 
(F  instead  of  F).  This  means  a  change  of  the  hereditary  strain. 

Thus  the  main  classification  of  mutations  turns  out  to  be  quite 
close  to  the  one  occurring  in  nature. 

]  .8  Evolution — Question  (E) 

The  observations  of  Section  1.7  tend  towards  the  transition  from 
question  (D)  to  question  (E).  On  (E),  itself,  the  question  of  evolu- 
tion, we  will  only  make  a  few  remarks  at  this  point. 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  incorporating  logical  devices  into  automata 
of  the  types  E  or  EF  which  will  modify  the  D,  F  areas  in  their  LD  , 
LD+F  ,  respectively,  depending  on  outside  stimuli  which  they  may 
have  received  previously.  This  would  amount  to  a  modification  of  the 
mass  of  heredity  that  they  represent  by  the  occurrences  (experiences) 
of  their  active  existence.  It  is  clear  that  this  is  a  step  in  the  right  di- 
rection, but  it  is  also  clear  that  it  requires  very  considerable  additional 
analyses  and  elaborations  to  become  really  relevant.  We  will  make  a 
few  remarks  on  this  subject  later. 

In  addition  to  this  it  must  be  remembered  that  conflicts  between 
independent  organisms  lead  to  consequences  which,  according  to  the 
theory  of  "natural  selection,"  are  believed  to  furnish  an  important 
mechanism  of  evolution.  As  was  seen  at  the  end  of  Section  1.7.3, 
our  models  lead  to  such  conflict  situations.  Hence  this  motive  for 
evolution  might  also  be  considered  within  the  framework  of  these 
models.  The  conditions  under  which  it  can  be  effective  here  may  be 
quite  complicated  ones,  but  they  deserve  study. 


Chapter  2 


A  SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  GENERAL 
TRANSITION  RULE 

2.1  Introduction 

2.1.1  The  model:  states  and  the  transition  rule.  In  this  chapter  we 
will  develop  the  first  model  that  possesses  the  potentialities  of  logical 
and  constructive  universality  and  of  self-reproduction  (cf.  questions 
(A)-(E)  in  Sec.  1.1.2.1),  as  well  as  the  other  attributes  evolved  in 
the  course  of  the  discussion  of  these  in  Chapter  1.  This  model  is 
based  on  a  crystalline  medium  (cf.  Sees.  1.3.3.1-1.3.3.3);  we  will  be 
able  to  construct  it  in  two  dimensions  and  to  use  there  the  quadratic1 
(regular)  lattice  {cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  1.3.3.3,  in  particular  questions 
(P)  and  (R)}.  Each  lattice  point  of  this  crystal  will  be  able  to  assume 
a  finite  number  of  different  states  (say  N  states)  and  its  behavior 
will  be  described  (or  controlled)  by  an  unambiguous  transition  rule, 
covering  all  transitions  between  these  states,  as  affected  by  the  states 
of  the  immediate  neighbors. 

We  will,  then,  perform  the  major  constructions  called  for  by  ques- 
tions (A)-(E)  in  Section  1.1.2.1  (and  the  relevant  subsequent 
discussions  of  Ch.  1)  for  a  specific  model  defined  along  these  lines. 

2.1.2  Formalization  of  the  spatial  and  the  temporal  relations.  At  this 
point  we  introduce  some  rigorous  concepts  and  notations. 

The  lattice  points  of  the  quadratic  crystal  (cf.  Sec.  2.1.1)  are 
designated  by  two  integer-valued  coordinates,  i,  j.  It  is  natural  to 
treat  the  crystal  as  unlimited  in  all  directions,  at  least  as  long  as  there 
does  not  emerge  some  definite  reason  for  proceeding  differently.  This 
determines  the  ranges  of  i,  j: 

(1)  i,j  =  0,  ±1,  ±2,  ...  . 

[It  does  not  matter  which  lattice  point  is  selected  as  the  origin 
(0,  0).]  The  pair  i,j  thus  represents  a  point  in  the  plane,  but  it  is  also 
convenient  to  view  it  as  a  vector,  i.e.,  to  treat  it  as  an  additive  quan- 

1  [The  lattice  points  of  a  quadratic  crystal  lie  at  the  corners  of  squares.] 




SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  133 

tity.  We  write 

(2)  - 

The  nearest  neighbors  of  (i,j)  are  the  four  points  (i  =b  l,j)>  (hj  ±  1). 
The  next  neighbors  are  the  four  points  (i  db  1 ,  j  ±  1 ) .  In  Figures  4a 
and  4c  the  nearest  neighbors  of  X  are  marked  with  small  circles 
(O),  and  the  next  nearest  neighbors  are  marked  with  heavy  dots 

(•). 

Put 

(3) 
and 

(4) 


=  (1,0),  v'  =  (0,  1), 

=  -v°  =  (-1,0),       v>  =  -v1  =  (0,  -1), 


ve  =  —v*  =  (  —  1,  —1),       v  =  —v  =  (1,  —  1). 


See  Figure  4b.  The  nearest  neighbors  of  &  are  the  #  +  va  (a  =  0,  •  •  •  , 
3),  and  the  next  neighbors  of  #  are  the  #  +  va  (a  =  4,  •  •  •  ,  7). 
One  might  hesitate  as  to  whether  the  immediate  neighbors  of  #  re- 
ferred to  in  Section  2.1.1  should  be,  among  the  $  +  va,  the  four  with 
a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3  or  the  eight  with  a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  7.  We  will  choose  the 
former,  since  it  leads  to  a  simpler  set  of  tools. 

In  Figures  4a  and  4b  the  crystal  lattice  was  shown  in  the  usual 
manner,  the  lattice  points  being  the  intersections  of  the  lines.  In 
future  figures  we  will  use  a  different  scheme:  the  lattice  points  will 
be  shown  as  squares,  and  immediate  neighbors  (which  in  Figs.  4a  and 
4b  were  connected  by  single  edges)  will  now  be  squares  in  contact 
(i.e.,  with  a  common  edge).  Furthermore,  we  will  always  show  only 
those  squares  (i.e.,  only  those  lattice  points)  which  are  needed  to 
illustrate  the  point  immediately  at  hand.  Thus  Figure  4a  assumes 
the  appearance  of  Figure  4c. 

As  discussed  in  Section  1.2.1,  the  range  of  time  t  is 

(5)  t  =  0,  d=l,  ±2,  ...  . 

Each  lattice  point  is  a  cell  in  the  sense  of  Sections  1.3.3.1  and 
1.4.1.1.  It  is  able  to  assume  N  states  (cf.  Sec.  2.1.1);  let  these  be 
designated  by  an  index 

(6)  n  =  0,  1,  •••  ,  N  -  1. 


The  state  of  cell  &  =  (£,  j)  at  time  t  will  therefore  be  written 
(7)  n,'. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Also,  the  N  numerals  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  N  —  1  used  in  expression  (6)  to 
designate  n  may  be  replaced  by  any  other  N  symbols,  according  to 
convenience. 

The  system  is  to  be  intrinsically  homogeneous  in  the  sense  of 
Section  1.3.3.2;  i.e.,  the  same  rule  will  govern  its  behavior  at  each 
lattice  point  This  rule  is  the  transition  rule  referred  to  in  Section 
2.1.1,  which  defines  the  state  of  the  cell  #  at  time  t  in  terms  of  its 
own  state  and  of  the  states  of  its  immediate  neighbors  at  suitable 
previous  times.  We  will  limit  and  simplify  our  system  by  restricting 
these  "suitable  previous  times"  to  precisely  the  immediate  prede- 
cessor of  t,  i.e.,  t  —  1.  Thus  n&  will  be  a  function  of  n#~l  and  of  the 
nf+va  (a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3).  That  is, 

(8)  n#  =  F(n#M.;  4+x,«  |  a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3). 

Let  m  take  the  place  of  n#  and  let  ma  take  the  place  of  n#+va  .  The 
function  F  then  becomes  F(m;  ma  \  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3).  This  TV-valued 
function  F  of  five  Af-valued  variables  represents,  therefore,  the  transi- 
tion rule.  It  is  the  sole  and  complete  rule  that  governs  the  behavior 
of  this  (intrinsically  homogeneous)  system. 

Note  that  the  range  of  F  has  N  elements,  while  the  domain  of  F 
(the  set  of  all  quintuplets)  has  Nb  elements.  Hence  there  are 

(9)  jV("6> 

possible  functions  F,  i.e.,  this  many  possible  transition  rules,  or 
models  of  the  class  under  consideration. 

2.1.3  Need  for  a  pre-formalistic  discussion  of  the  states.  Let  us  now 
discuss  in  a  more  heuristic  way  what  the  N  states  of  a  cell  should  be. 
The  nature  of  these  states  is,  of  course,  described  not  by  their  enumer- 
ation (6),  but  by  the  transition  rule  (8).  The  only  relevant  informa- 
tion contained  in  (6 )  is  the  number  of  states,  N.  In  accord  with  this, 
the  rigorous  summation  of  these  considerations  will  consist  of  a 
specification  of  the  transition  rule  (8),  i.e.,  of  the  function  F.  In  the 
present,  heuristic  stage,  however,  it  will  be  better  to  proceed  with  an 
enumeration  (6),  attaching  to  each  n  of  (6)  a  name  and  a  verbal 
description  of  the  role  that  it  is  intended  to  play.  In  this  connection 
we  will  also  make  use  of  the  possibility  of  notational  changes,  referred 
to  in  the  remark  after  (6)  and  (7)  in  Section  2.1.2. 

2.2  Logical  Functions — Ordinary  Transmission  States 

2.2.1  Logical-neuronal  functions.  To  begin  with,  states  are  needed 
to  express  the  properly  logical  or  neuronal  functions,  as  discussed  in 
Section  1.2.1.  This  calls  for  the  equivalents  of  the  neurons  of  Figure 
3  and  of  their  connecting  lines. 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  135 

2.2.2.1  Transmission  states — connecting  lines.  We  consider  first 
the  connecting  lines.  These  must  now  be  rows  of  cells,  i.e.,  of  lattice 
points.  Since  a  line  must  be  able  to  pass  a  (neural)  stimulus,  each  one 
of  its  cells  must  possess,  for  this  purpose  alone,  a  quiescent  and  an 
excited  state.  The  purpose  that  we  consider  here  is  to  transmit  a 
(neural)  stimulus.  We  call  these  therefore  the  transmission  states 
of  the  cell  and  designate  them  by  the  symbol  T.  We  use  an  index 
e  =  0,  1;  i.e.,  we  write  Tt  to  indicate  quiescence  and  excitation.  Let 
e  =  0  designate  the  former  and  e  =  1  the  latter. 

This  transmission  must  be  a  directed  process,  since  the  lines  (that 
the  cells  in  transmission  states  replace)  were  directed  to  connect 
definite  points.  Hence  we  must  set  up  certain  limitations.  We  may 
stipulate  that  a  cell  in  a  transmission  state  accepts  a  stimulus  only 
from  one,  definite  direction,  its  input  direction.  That  is,  an  excited 
transmission  cell  brings  an  immediate  neighbor  (which  is  a  quiescent 
transmission  cell)  into  the  excited  transmission  state  (or,  if  the  latter 
is  found  in  that  state,  it  keeps  it  there)  only  if  the  former  lies  in  the 
latter's  input  direction.  Alternatively,  we  may  also  stipulate  that  a 
cell  in  a  transmission  state  emits  a  stimulus  only  in  one,  definite 
direction,  its  output  direction.  That  is,  an  excited  transmission  cell 
brings  an  immediate  neighbor  (which  is  a  quiescent  transmission 
cell)  into  the  excited  transmission  state  (or,  if  the  latter  is  found  in 
that  state,  it  keeps  it  there)  only  if  the  latter  lies  in  the  former's 
output  direction.  Finally,  we  may  make  both  stipulations  together. 

After  trying  various  models  along  these  lines,  it  appeared  most 
convenient  to  stipulate  a  definite  output  direction.  In  order  to  avoid 
certain  uncontrolled,  and  hence  undesirable,  return-stimulation 
phenomena,  it  seems  desirable,  while  not  prescribing  any  particular 
input  direction,  to  specify  that  the  output  direction  is  insensitive  to 
inputs. 

The  va(a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3)  of  Figure  4b  enumerate  all  possible  direc- 
tions for  an  immediate  neighbor  (cf.  the  remarks  after  expressions 
(3)  and  (4)  in  Sec.  2.1.2).  Hence  the  Te  will  be  given  a  further  index 
a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3:  Tac ,  so  that  Tae  has  the  output  direction  va.  The 
above  stipulations  now  assume  this  form:  Ta>i  at  induces  T«i  at 
*  (from  Ta0  or  T«i)  if  and  only  if  &  =  &'  +  va\  but  +  va, 

i.e.,  if  and  only  if  #  —  &'  =  va  ^  —  va. 

Let  us  now  use  the  symbols  Tae  (a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3;  e  =  0,  1)  in  place 
of  some  eight  number  values  in  expression  (6)  (cf.  the  remark  after 
expression  (6)  and  (7)  in  Sec.  2.1.2).  Let  us  also  recognize  the  unit 
time  delay  of  the  stimulus-response  process,  as  discussed  in  Section 
2.1.2.  Then  the  above  rule  becomes: 




THEORY  OF  SELF-HEPUODIHM N( J  AUTOMATA 


I  Then  n*  =  Tal  if  n#7*  =  TV, 
for  some     with  §  —  §'  =  va  ^  —va. 
Otherwise  n&  =  Ta0 . 


Assume  n&    1  =  T«, 


(10) 


2.2.2.2  Delays,  corners,  and  turns  in  connecting  lines.  Note  that 
this  model  for  the  connecting  lines  differs  from  the  one  considered  in 
Section  1.2.1  in  that  it  introduces  finite  propagation  delays.  We  have 
now  a  unit  time  delay  between  immediate  neighbors.  However,  this 
deviation  from  the  pattern  of  Section  1.2.1  will  have  no  relevant 
undesirable  consequences. 

Note  also  that  this  model  serves  equally  to  synthesize  straight 
connecting  lines  from  transmission  cells,  and  connecting  lines  with 
corners  or  turns  in  them.  Straight  lines  are  shown  in  Figures  5a-5d; 
these  represent  the  four  possible  "straight"  directions  in  our  lattice. 
"Corners"  and  "turns"  are  shown  in  Figures  5e  and  5f.  Figures 
5a-5f  are  drawn  according  to  the  rules  stated  in  Figure  4c.  Figures 
5a'-5f'  are  simplified  (and  more  easily  readable)  versions  of  Figures 
5a-5f,  respectively,  in  which  each  Ta€  is  replaced  by  the  arrow  of  its 
va  (cf.  Fig.  4b). 

We  consider  next  the  specific  neurons  of  Figure  3. 


2.3.1  The  +  neuron.  The  +  neuron  merely  calls  for  an  excitable 
cell  which  has  an  output  and  two  possible  inputs.  There  is,  of  course, 
no  harm  done  if  it  can  accommodate  more  than  two  such  inputs.  We 
defined  a  transmission  cell  in  Section  2.2.2.1  so  that  it  has  three 
possible  inputs.  Every  one  of  its  four  sides,  excepting  the  output  side, 
is  an  input.  Thus  our  transmission  cells  not  only  fulfill  the  function 
of  (elements  of)  connecting  lines  between  neurons  (this  being  the 
function  for  which  they  were  originally  intended),  but  also  fill  the 
role  of  +  neurons. 

The  use  of  an  ordinary  transmission  cell  as  a  +  neuron,  i.e.,  as  a 
connecting  line  junction,  is  shown  in  Figure  5g.  This  figure  is  drawn 
according  to  the  scheme  of  Figures  5a'-5f'. 

2.3.2  Confluent  states:  the  •  neuron.  The  •  neuron  calls  for  an  excita- 
ble cell  that  has  an  output  and  two  inputs,  which  must  be  stimulated 
together  in  order  to  produce  excitation.  It  would  be  quite  practical 
to  introduce  a  class  of  such  states.  However,  a  free  choice  of  an  output 
direction  and  two  input  directions  (from  the  totality  of  four  possible 
directions,  as  represented  by  the  va,  a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3),  would  require 
(4  X  3  X  2)/2  =  12  kinds,  and,  since  there  must  be  a  quiescent  and 
an  excited  state  for  each  kind,  a  total  of  24  states.  It  is  possible  to 


2.3  Neurons — Confluent  States 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  137 

achieve  equally  satisfactory  results  with  more  economy,  namely 
with  only  one  kind,  and  hence  with  two  states.  This  can  be  done  by 
prescribing  no  particular  input  or  output  directions  at  all,  i.e.,  by 
stipulating  that  every  direction  is  a  possible  input,  as  well  as  a  possible 
output.  In  addition  to  this,  one  can  then  prescribe  as  the  prerequisite 
of  excitation  a  minimum  of  two  stimulations,  i.e.,  a  minimum  of  two 
excited  transmission  cells  that  are  immediate  neighbors  and  in  whose 
output  direction  our  cell  lies.  However,  it  is  still  more  convenient  to 
frame  this  condition  more  elastically  and  to  stipulate  that  the  cell 
under  consideration  gets  excited  if  every  immediately  neighboring 
transmission  cell,  whose  output  direction  points  at  this  cell,  is  itself 
excited.  (This  is  to  be  taken  with  the  exclusion  of  the  subcase — which 
is  strictly  logically  admissible,  but  obviously  conflicting  with  the 
intention — that  none  of  the  immediate  neighbors  qualifies,  i.e.,  is  a 
transmission  cell  and  has  its  output  direction  pointing  at  this  cell.) 
This  formulation  of  the  rule  has  the  effect  that  the  cell  under  con- 
sideration can  act  as  a  neuron  of  threshold  one  (i.e.,  from  the  point 
of  view  of  inputs,  like  an  ordinary  transmission  cell),  or  two  (i.e., 
like  the  desired  •  neuron),  or  three  (i.e.,  like  a  combination  of  two  • 
neurons),  depending  on  whether  one,  two,  or  three,  respectively,  of  its 
immediate  neighbors  are  transmission  cells  with  their  output  direc- 
tions pointing  at  it.  (Since  this  cell  should  not  be  able  to  stimulate 
any  transmission  cell  whose  output  direction  is  pointing  at  it — cf. 
rule  (10)  and  its  adaptation  to  the  present  situation  in  rule  (12) 
below — it  would  be  pointless  to  have  all  of  its  four  immediate  neigh- 
bors in  such  a  state.  This  situation  would  preclude  any  results  of  an 
excitation  of  our  cell.) 

We  will  call  these  states  of  a  cell  confluent  states,  and  designate 
them  by  the  symbol  C.  We  again  use  the  index  e  =  0,  1;  that  is,  we 
write  C€  to  indicate  quiescence  (e  =  0)  and  excitation  (e  =  1).  We 
proceed  now  similarly  as  we  did  at  the  end  of  Section  2.2.2.1.  We 
use  the  symbols  Ce  (e  =  0,  1)  in  place  of  two  number  values  in  ex- 
pression (6)  (cf.  the  remark  after  expressions  (6)  and  (7)  in  Sec. 
2.1.2).  The  rule  that  we  formulated  above  now  becomes,  inasmuch 
as  it  affects  the  inputs  to  C: 

Assume  n&~1  =  C€ . 


(11) 


Then  n*  =  d  ,  if  both  (a),  (b)  hold: 

(a)  nlv1  =  T«'i  for  some  #'  with  #  -  /  =  va' . 

(b)  Never  n#~l  =  T^0  for  an  with  &  -  #'  =  va' . 
Otherwise  n/  =  C0 . 


The  portion  of  the  rule  that  affects  the  outputs  of  C  must  be  stated 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


as  a  modification  of  rule  (10),  since  it  provides  for  a  new  way  to 
excite  a  transmission  cell,  i.e.,  to  produce  a  T«i  from  a  Tac  .  This  is 
expressed  by  the  following  insertion  between  the  second  and  third 
sentences  of  rule  (10): 

s  19v         (Also  n#  =  T«i    if    n^T1  =  Ci  for  some 

{  Z)        \with  0  -  y  =  /  ^  -if       08  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3). 

Note  that  the  system  of  rules  (10),  (11),  and  (12)  provides  for 
excitation  of  T  by  T,  also  of  C  by  T,  and  T  by  C,  but  not  for  an  excita- 
tion of  C  by  C.  This  arrangement  will  have  no  relevant  undesirable 
consequences. 

A  •  neuron  with  its  close  surroundings  is  shown  in  Figure  6a.  This 
figure  is  drawn  according  to  the  scheme  of  Figures  5a'-5f'  and  5g. 
The  confluent  state  C  here  makes  its  first  appearance. 

2.3.S  The  —  neuron.  The  —  neuron  calls  for  an  excitable  cell  in 
which  the  roles  of  quiescence  and  excitation  are  interchanged  in 
comparison  with  the  transmission  states.  It  must  be  ordinarily  excited 
(i.e.,  able  to  excite  an  immediately  neighboring  cell  in  a  transmission 
state,  at  which  its  output  direction  points),  but  it  must  be  made 
quiescent  by  an  input  stimulation  (reverting  to  excitation  when  the 
stimulation  ceases).  We  could  introduce  a  class  of  such  states — e.g., 
with  a  given  output  direction,  all  other  directions  being  input  direc- 
tions, just  as  in  the  transmission  states.  Since  there  are  four  possible 
directions,  this  would  require  four  kinds,  and  with  quiescence  and 
excitation  for  each  kind,  eight  states  would  be  needed.  However,  we 
are  reluctant  to  introduce  a  class  of  such  states  whose  ordinary, 
unperturbed  condition  is  not  quiescence.  This  objection  could  be 
circumvented  in  various  ways,  with  higher  or  lower  degrees  of  econ- 
omy.2 We  shall  find  that  a  class  of  states  which  we  will  introduce 
later  for  other  reasons  can  be  used  to  synthesize  the  function  of 
the  —  neuron.  We  can  therefore  forego  altogether  taking  care  of  it 
at  this  stage. 

2.34  The  split.  Although  all  the  neuron  species  of  Figure  3,  as 

2  [Von  Neumann  here  referred  to  the  double  line  trick  of  his  "Probabilistic 
Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from  Unreliable  Components," 
Collected  Works  5.337.  Using  only  -f  neurons  and  •  neurons,  he  synthesized  a 
complete  set  of  truth-functional  primitives  by  using  a  pair  of  lines  with  the 
codings  01  (for  "zero")  and  10  (for  "one").  In  other  words,  each  line  of  the 
pair  is  in  the  opposite  state  from  the  other  line  of  the  pair,  so  that  negation  may 
be  realized  by  interchanging  (crossing)  the  two  lines  of  a  pair.  But  in  the  pres- 
ent manuscript  von  Neumann  synthesized  negation  from  the  destructive  (re- 
verse) and  constructive  (direct)  processes  of  Sees.  2.5  and  2.6  below.  An  exam- 
ple of  this  synthesis  is  given  in  Fig.  17  of  Sec.  3.2  below.] 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE 




well  as  their  connecting  lines,  have  been  disposed  of,  there  remains 
one  more  entity  in  this  category  to  consider.  Logical  (i.e.,  neuronal) 
networks  in  the  sense  of  Section  1.2.1  must  in  most  cases  contain 
connecting  lines  that  lead  from  one  output  to  several  inputs,  i.e., 
output  lines  that  have  to  be  split.  (This  was  mentioned  in  Sec.  1.2.1.) 3 
That  is,  transmission-like  states  with  several  outputs  are  needed. 

However,  it  suffices  to  note  that  our  definition  of  the  confluent 
states  takes  care  of  this  need.  (Cf.  Sec.  2.3.2,  in  particular  the  discus- 
sion of  the  "threshold  1"  geometry  for  this  class  of  states,  near  the 
end  of  Sec.  2.3.2.  In  this  condition  the  cell  has  one  input,  and  there- 
fore up  to  three  possible  outputs.) 

A  split  that  is  achieved  by  using  the  confluent  states  is  shown  in 
Figure  6b.  This  figure  is  drawn  according  to  the  scheme  of  Figure  6a. 
This  is  also  true  of  all  subsequent  figures,  with  such  exceptions  and 
modifications  as  are  expressly  stated. 

2.4  Growth  Functions:  Unexcitable  State  and  Special 
Transmission  States 

2.4-1  Muscular  or  growth  functions — ordinary  vs.  special  stimuli. 
Having  finished  with  the  logical  (i.e.,  neuronal)  functions  in  the  sense 
of  Section  1.2.1,  we  can  now  pass  to  the  others.  In  Section  1.2.2  these 
were  temporarily  designated  as  muscular,  but  the  discussion  of  Section 
1.3  showed  that  they  are  more  properly  viewed  and  treated  as  growth 
functions  (cf.  in  particular  Sees.  1.3.4.2  and  1.3.4.3).  At  any  rate, 
we  need  states  to  express  these  functions. 

We  know  (cf.  the  above  references)  that  this  leads  over  into  the 
problem  of  ordinary  vs.  special  stimuli,  i.e.,  of  ordinary  vs.  special 
excited  states.  The  ordinary  class  is  the  one  used  for  logical  purposes, 
i.e.,  the  one  considered  up  to  now  (specifically  in  Sees.  2.1.3-2.3.2). 
The  special  class  is  the  one  that  we  will  have  to  introduce  now,  in 
order  to  take  care  of  the  functions  referred  to  above. 

24.2  Unexcitable  state.  The  purpose  of  the  special  class  of  excited 
states  is  to  induce  growth  in  the  sense  of  Sections  1.3.4.2  and  1.3.4.3, 
i.e.,  to  transfer  cells  from  unexcitable  to  excitable  states,  and  within 
the  latter  category  also  to  determine  the  state's  species.  As  for  the 
last  mentioned  determination,  we  have  already  stipulated  the  exist- 
ence of  several  species:  the  transmission,  or  T  states,  which  formed 
four  species,  the  Ta  ,  a  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  3;  and  the  confluent  species  C 
(cf.  Sees.  2.2.2.1  and  2.3.2).  Note  that  each  of  these  actually  corre- 

3  [In  his  list  of  footnotes  von  Neumann  wrote  here  "Degeneration  (?)."  I 
do  not  know  what  he  intended.  Possibly  he  was  going  to  say  that  power  ampli- 
fication is  needed  when  one  input  line  drives  two  or  more  output  lines.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


sponds  to  two  states,  with  e  =  0,  1  (quiescent  and  excited) :  Tac ,  C£  . 
We  need  nevertheless  refer  to  the  species  Ta  ,  C  only,  or,  to  be  more 
precise,  to  the  states  with  e  =  0  only:  Ta0 ,  C0 .  The  reason  is  that  it 
suffices  to  be  able  to  create  each  excitable  species  in  its  quiescent 
state.  If  the  excited  state  is  wanted,  it  can  be  induced  later  by  ordi- 
nary stimuli  (for  the  latter,  cf.  Sees.  1.3.4.2  and  2.4.1). 

It  is  therefore  necessary  to  introduce  the  unexcitable  state  (un- 
excitable  by  ordinary  stimuli,  cf.  the  above  observations  and  refer- 
ences). We  will  designate  it  by  U.  Before  we  give  a  rigorous  account 
of  its  properties,  however,  we  must  discuss  some  connected  matters. 

2.4.3  Direct  and  reverse  processes — special  transmission  states.  It 
is  desirable  not  only  to  be  able  to  effect  transfers  from  the  unexcitable 
state  U  into  excitable  states  (for  example,  T  and  C;  cf.  the  discussion 
in  Sec.  2.4.2),  but  also  to  have  this  process  reversible,  that  is,  to  be 
able  to  effect  transfers  from  the  excitable  states  into  U.  Various  uses 
of  this  two-way  operability  will  appear  later.  Now  the  stimuli  which 
induce  all  these  metamorphoses  must  be  transmitted  by  cell  states 
which  are  not  themselves  affected  by  them  in  such  a  way.  It  is  there- 
fore advisable  to  introduce  a  new  class  of  transmission  states,  say 
T',  which  are  in  their  relationship  to  each  other  analogs  of  the  T. 
We  will  therefore  have  eight  such  states:  Ta£  (a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3;  e  = 
0,  1) — in  analogy  to  the  Ta€  of  Section  2.2.2.1.  Accordingly,  we  pro- 
ceed the  way  we  did  for  the  Ta€ ,  i.e.,  in  rule  (10)  of  Section  2.2.2.1. 

We  use  the  symbols  Tac  (a  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3;  e  =  0,  1 )  in  place  of  some 
eight-number  values  in  expression  (6)  (cf.  the  remark  after  expres- 
sions (6)  and  (7)  in  Sec.  2.1.2).  The  rule  is: 

Assume  n/"1  =  Tle . 
(13)  J  Then  n&  =  Tai    if   n<rl  =  Ta>i  for  some 

with  #  —  y  =  va  —va. 
Otherwise  n#  =  Ta0 . 

2.5  The  Reverse  Process 

2.5.1.1  The  reverse  process  for  the  ordinary  states.  We  can  now  give 
a  rigorous  definition  of  the  reverse  process,  that  is,  the  transfer  of  an 
excitable  state  (T,  C)  into  an  unexcitable  one  (U)  by  the  special 
stimuli  (of  T').  This  takes  the  form  of  modifications  of  the  T  rules 
(10),  (12)  and  of  the  C  rule  (11): 


(14) 


Assume  n&  1  =  Ta€   or   C6 . 

Then  the  following  rule  overrides  the  rules  of  (10),  (12)  and 

of  (11):  f  f 

[n#  =  U    if    n^/ 1  =  Taa    for  some     with  #  —  &'  =  va  . 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE 




Note  that  #  —  ^  —  va  {in  the  T  case,  cf.  the  similar  stipulations 
in  rules  (10)  and  (12)}  is  not  required;  that  is,  the  "kill"  by  a  special 
stimulus  (from  a  T')  is  efficacious  even  in  the  output  direction  (of  T). 

2.5,1.2  The  reverse  process  for  the  special  states.  The  reasons  which 
make  the  existence  of  the  reverse  process  (from  excitable  to  unexcita- 
ble;  cf.  Sec.  2.4.3  and  later)  desirable  for  the  ordinary  excitable 
states  (T,  C),  operate  in  the  case  of  the  special  ones  (T')  too.  How- 
ever, rule  (14)  could  not  be  extended  to  the  T'  states;  such  an  effect 
of  a  T'  on  a  T'  is  inadmissible  for  the  same  reason  for  which  the 
corresponding  effect  of  a  T  on  a  T  is  inadmissible  (cf.  Sec.  2.4.3) :  it 
would  destroy  the  character  of  the  T  as  transmission  states  for 
special  stimuli,  just  as  the  corresponding  effect  would  have  destroyed 
the  character  of  the  T  as  transmission  states  for  ordinary  stimuli. 
The  latter  circumstance  caused  us  to  introduce  the  T'  (to  transfer 
the  T,  as  well  as  the  C,  into  U) ;  we  can  now  make  a  similar  use  of  the 
T  (to  transfer  the  T'  into  U).  It  is  advisable,  however,  not  to  endow 
the  C,  too,  with  this  property.  Indeed,  since  every  direction  is  an 
output  direction  for  C,  giving  this  faculty  to  C  would  make  it  much 
more  difficult  to  direct  and  to  control  than  is  desirable.  We  introduce 
therefore  this  rule,  which  modifies  (13): 

f Assume  n#~l  =  t1<= . 
(15)    \  Then  the  following  rule  overrides  the  rules  of  (13) : 

[n/  =  U    if   n^T1  =  Ta'i    for  some     with  #  —  #  =  va  . 

The  remark  at  the  end  of  Section  2.5.1.1,  concerning  the  outputs, 
applies  here,  too. 

2.5.2  Origination  of  special  stimuli.  We  have  not  provided  so  far 
for  the  origination  of  special  pulses,  i.e.,  for  the  excitation  of  the  T  , 
except  by  each  other. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  introduce  a  complete  (logical)  neuronic 
system  for  special  stimuli,  as  we  did  for  ordinary  stimuli  in  Sections 
2.2.2.1-2.3.4.  We  can  handle  all  of  logics  with  ordinary  stimuli,  as 
was  indeed  intended  in  introducing  them  (cf.  Sees.  1.3.4.2  and 
1.3.4.3),  and  use  these  to  start  chains  of  special  stimuli,  whenever 
necessary.  (The  physiological  analog  of  this  is  that  logics  are  re- 
stricted to  neuronal  activity,  and  that  muscular  activity  is  always 
induced  and  controlled  by  neuronal  activity.  See  Sec.  1.2.2  for 
the  simile.)  Hence  we  need  a  class  of  states  which  can  respond  to  an 
ordinary  stimulus  by  emitting  a  special  one,  i.e.,  which  can  be  excited 
by  a  T  and  can  excite  a  T'. 

Before  introducing  a  new  class  for  this  purpose,  let  us  see  whether 
we  might  not  do  it  with  the  existing  ones.  T  does  not  excite  T'  {it 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


"kills"  it;  cf.  rule  (15)} ;  hence  we  can  use  neither  T  nor  T'  for  this 
purpose.  This  leaves  only  C.  Now  C  is  excited  by  a  T;  hence  we  need 
only  endow  it  with  the  ability  to  excite  a  T'.  This  can  be  done.  (That 
T'  does  not  excite  a  C — but  "kills"  it;  cf.  Sec.  2.5.1.1 — is  irrelevant 
in  this  connection.)  All  we  need  is  to  stipulate  the  analog  of  rule  (12) 
for  T'.  Thus  the  duality  of  T  and  T  ,  already  expressed  by  the  duality 
of  rules  (10)  and  (13),  and  by  the  duality  of  rules  (14)  and  (15),  is 
further  completed  by  the  duality  of  (12)  and  of  (16)  that  we  will  now 
state.  This  is  to  be  viewed  as  an  insertion  between  the  second  and 
third  sentences  of  (13),  and  it  is  therefore,  like  the  original  (13), 
overridden  by  (15).  The  rule  follows: 

(    .     fAlso  n#  =  T„i ,  if  ni'1  =  Q  ,  for 

U  ;    \some  y  with  0  -  tf'  =  /  ^  -v*       (0  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  3). 

2.6  The  Direct  Process — Sensitized  States 

2.6.1  The  direct  process.  The  reverse  process  of  Section  2.4.3  (trans- 
fer from  excitable  to  unexcitable)  having  been  taken  care  of,  we  pass 
now  to  considering  the  (primarily  required)  direct  process  of  Section 
2.4.2  (transfer  from  unexcitable  to  excitable). 

The  list  of  species  that  this  process  must  be  able  to  create  has  been 
extended.  We  had  the  Ta  and  C  in  Section  2.4.2;  to  these  we  must 
add,  since  Section  2.4.3,  the  Ta.  In  other  words,  we  must  be  able 
to  create  the  following  states  (for  the  role  of  e  =  0  compare  the 
discussion  in  Sec.  2.4.2) : 

(17) 

This  is  a  total  of  nine  states. 

Thus  we  need  a  mechanism  to  transfer  U  into  any  one  of  the  nine 
states  of  (17).  Regarding  this  mechanism  two  remarks  are  in  order. 

2.6.2.1  First  remark:  duality  of  ordinary  and  special  states.  We  have 
two  kinds  of  stimuli  at  our  disposal :  ordinary  and  special,  correspond- 
ing to  the  excitation  of  the  T  (possibly  together  with  the  C)  and  of 
the  T'  states,  respectively.  Our  original  intention  had  been  to  use 
only  the  special  stimuli,  i.e.,  the  T'  states,  for  transforming  U  into 
any  one  of  the  nine  states  of  (17)  (cf.  Sees.  2.4.1  and  2.4.2).  Subse- 
quently however,  in  dealing  with  the  reverse  process  (cf.  Sees.  2.4.3- 
2.5.2),  we  let  the  T  (actually  without  the  C)  and  the  T  states  play 
rather  complementary  and  symmetric  roles  with  respect  to  each 
other  (cf.  the  references  to  "duality"  at  the  end  of  Sec.  2.5.2).  It  is 
therefore  tempting  to  assign  to  them  similarly  symmetric  roles  in 
connection  with  the  direct  process. 

This  might  again  be  done  in  a  dual  way,  i.e.,  by  using  the  T  for 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  143 

transfers  from  U  to  T  (and  to  C)  and  the  T  for  transfers  from  U  to 
T'.  However,  even  this  limitation  will  prove  to  be  unnecessary,  and 
a  satisfactory  system  can  be  built  by  stipulating  that  T  and  T'  have 
identical  and  interchangable  effects  on  U  for  transfers  into  all  states 
T,  C,  and  T'  {i.e.,  all  nine  states  of  (17)}. 

This  raises  the  question  of  why  T'  had  to  be  introduced  at  all,  if  T 
alone  can  induce  and  control  all  transfers  from  U.  The  answer  is  that 
the  reverse  process  called  for  T'  because  of  the  contrast  between 
transmission  and  causing  transfer  into  U;  compare  rules  (10)  and 
(12)  with  rule  (14),  and  rules  (13)  and  (16)  with  rule  (15).  More- 
over, the  reverse  process  (transfer  from  T,  T',  or  C  into  U)  is  a 
prerequisite  for  a  proper  control  of  the  direct  process  (transfer  from 
U  into  T,  T',  or  C — or  even  into  T  or  C  only).  This  point  deserves 
somewhat  closer  consideration. 

2.6,2.2  The  need  for  the  reverse  process.  In  Figure  7,  cells  1,  •  •  •  ,  9 
constitute  an  area  of  3  X  3  cells  (i.e.,  lattice  points;  cf.  the  explana- 
tion of  Fig.  4c)  which  is  to  be  organized,  that  is,  transferred  from  the 
U  states  into  various  (prescribed)  states,  e.g.,  T  states.  This  organiza- 
tion of  cells  1,  •  •  •  ,  9  is  to  originate  from  and  be  controlled  by  area  0. 

Consider  the  transfer  of  the  middle  cell,  number  5.  Whether  this  is 
done  by  ordinary  or  by  special  pulses  (i.e.,  by  T  or  by  T'  excitations), 
an  unbroken  chain  of  (T  or  T')  transmission  cells  must  be  laid  down, 
from  the  area  of  the  origination  and  logical  control  of  these  excita- 
tions to  the  cell  to  be  operated  on,  in  this  case  number  5.  In  Figure  7 
the  cells  marked  with  arrows  form  the  chain;  they  may  be  Ta  accord- 
ing to  Figure  5  or  their  corresponding  Ta.  This  chain  must  cross  the 
ring  of  cells  that  surround  the  target  cell  number  5,  i.e.,  the  ring  of 
cells  numbered  1,  •  •  •  ,  4,  6,  •  •  •  ,  9.  In  Figure  7  the  chain  crosses  at 
cell  number  8. 

Now  the  desired  organization  of  the  area  1,  •  •  •  ,  9  may  provide 
for  the  cell  of  the  cross-over  (in  this  case  number  8;  cf.  above)  another 
(quiescent  )  state  than  that  of  the  chain.  (The  latter  must  be  a  Ta 
or  a  Ta  state,  with  va  in  the  direction  of  the  chain;  this  is  a  =  1  in 
the  present  case;  cf.  Figs.  4b  and  7.)  Hence  the  organization  of  this 
cell  cannot  have  occurred  before  that  of  cell  number  5.  If  it  is  to  occur 
after  that  of  cell  number  5,  then  the  (T  or  T')  cell  of  the  chain  that 
is  involved  must  be  transferred  into  the  desired  state.  Since  the  direct 
process  allows  the  transfer  from  U  into  any  desired  state,  it  is  simplest 
to  provide  for  a  way  to  transfer  from  the  present  (T  or  T')  state  into 
U.  Hence  the  reverse  process  is  indeed  necessary. 

2.6.3.1  Second  remark:  the  need  for  fixed  stimulus  sequences  to  con- 
trol the  direct  process.  We  observed  near  the  end  of  Section  2.6.2.1 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


that  the  direct  process  {i.e.,  the  transfer  from  U  into  the  states  of  list 
(17)}  should  be  effected  by  the  stimuli  due  to  T  and  T'  excitations, 
and  that  it  will  prove  possible  to  let  both  (i.e.,  T  and  T')  have 
exactly  the  same  effects  in  this  respect.  It  will  also  appear  later  that 
this  arrangement  is  more  economical  in  some  relevant  ways  than  its 
obvious  alternatives. 

It  is  again  advisable  to  exclude  the  C  from  this  process.  The  reasons 
for  using  the  direct  process  here  are  the  same  as  those  given  (in  Sec. 
2.5.1.2)  for  using  the  reverse  process.  Note  in  addition  that,  just 
because  every  direction  is  an  output  direction  for  C,  it  is  often  neces- 
sary to  protect  certain  sides  of  a  C,  and  for  this  function  a  U  is 
natural  (cf.  later).  Hence  it  would  be  most  inconvenient  if  a  C  had 
any  effect  on  a  U. 

The  direct  process  must  provide  for  transfers  from  U  into  every  one 
of  the  nine  states  of  list  (17).  These  nine  alternatives  are  too  many  to 
be  handled  by  a  single  stimulus,  even  if  T  and  T'  excitations  had 
different  effects.  Besides,  we  stipulated  that  T  and  T'  have  the  same 
effects  in  this  process.  Hence  the  nine  alternatives  which  are  now 
needed  must  be  expressed  by  some  binary  coded  stimulus  sequence. 
In  this  binary  code  a  digit  1  is  expressed  by  a  stimulus  (T  or  T'), 
while  a  digit  0  is  expressed  by  the  absence  of  a  stimulus.  Coded 
sequences  of  length  three  can  express  eight  alternatives:  000, 001,  •  •  •  , 
111.  Since  nine  alternatives  are  wanted,  one  of  these — e.g.,  the  first 
one,  000 — must  be  made  to  express  two  further  alternatives;  i.e.,  it 
must  be  continued  to  0000  and  0001.  Thus  we  end  up  with  the  nine 
coded  sequences 


This  must  be  made  to  correspond  to  the  nine  states  of  list  (17). 

The  nine  coded  sequences  of  list  (18)  will  have  to  be  built  up 
successively  from  their  constituent  digits  0  and  1.  That  is,  in  the 
(direct)  process  of  transfer,  U  will  have  to  go  through  intermediate 
states  corresponding  to  the  subsequences  encountered  in  building 
up  the  nine  coded  sequences  of  list  (18).  These  coded  subsequences 
are 


i.e.,  their  number  is  seven.  Finally,  there  must  be  a  state  correspond- 
ing to  the  beginning  of  the  process,  where  the  formation  of  the  coded 
sequence  {going  through  subsequences  of  list  (19)  to  a  sequence  of 
list  (18)}  has  not  yet  begun.  Here  the  coded  subsequence  is  best 


(18) 


0000,  0001,  001,  010,  011 
100,  101,  110,  111. 


(19) 


SYSTEM   OF  29  STATES   W  ITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE 


interpreted  as  being  (in  its  initial  condition)  the  empty  set,  to  he 
designated 

(20)  e. 

2.6.3.2  Additional  states  required.  Let  us  use  a  common  symbol  2 
for  the  17  coded  sequences  of  lists  (20),  (19),  and  (18).  These  must 
correspond  to  17  states  to  be  designated  Sz  .  However,  the  with 
the  9  2  of  list  (18)  must  be  the  9  states  of  list  (17);  i.e.,  these  are 
not  new  states.  In  addition,  we  must  consider  whether  it  is  not  natural 
and  proper  to  make  Ss  with  the  2  of  (20)  (i.e.,  Se)  coincide  with  U. 

The  direct  process  goes  from  Se  through  the  S2  of  list  (19)  to  the 
Ss  of  list  (18)  {i.e.,  to  the  states  of  list  (17)},  by  adding  a  digit  1  to 
2  when  a  (T  or  T')  stimulus  occurs,  and  by  adding  a  digit  0  to  2 
when  no  stimulus  occurs.  { Of  course,  this  process  of  increasing  2  ceases 
to  operate  when  2  has  reached  its  maximum  size  (18).  Then  we  deal 
with  the  states  of  list  (17),  and  these  are  governed  by  the  rules  (10)- 
(16).}  This  means  that  the  evolution  from  Se  to  the  final  Ss  {with-2 
maximal,  i.e.,  according  to  list  (18)}  is  rigidly  timed.  The  absence  of 
the  stimulus  has  as  definite  an  effect  as  the  presence  of  one,  and  there- 
fore the  stimuli  that  are  required  must  be  delivered  at  definite  times, 
without  any  delays  other  than  the  expressly  required  ones.  On  the 
other  hand,  U  was  always  conceived  of  as  a  quiescent  state;  it  should 
not  change  unless  it  receives  a  stimulus.  Combining  these  two  facts, 
we  see  therefore  that  U  and  Se  must  not  be  identified.  Thus  we  come 
out  with  eight  new  states,  namely  the  Ss  with  the  2  of  lists  (20)  and 
(19). 

2.6.4  Sensitized  states.  We  call  the  new  states,  to  which  Sections 
2.6.3.1  and  2.6.3.2  lead  us,  sensitized  states.  To  restate,  these  are  the 
Ss  ,  with  2  according  to  lists  (20)  and  (19),  but  not  according  to  list 
(18)  {the  latter  being  the  old  states  of  list  (17)}. 

The  rigorous  rules  that  control  the  behavior  of  U  and  of  the  sensi- 
tized states  can  now  be  extracted  from  the  discussions  of  Sections 
2.6.3.1  and  2.6.3.2.  These  rules  are: 

Assume  n/_1  =  U. 
Thenn^  =  Se  if  n#~l  =  TViorTU 
for  some     with  #  —  &'  =  va  . 
^  Otherwise  n#  =  U. 

f  Assume  n/"1  =  Ss  with  a  2  of  (20)  or  (19). 
j  Then  n/  =  S21  if  n^T1  =  TVi  or 
]  for  some     with  #  —  &'  —  va' . 
Otherwise  n&  =  Sso. 

[Note  that  Sao  =  So ,  S01O  =  S10 ,  Sam  =  Sm  ,  etc.  ] 


(21) 


14G 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


2.7  Even  and  Odd  Delays 

2.7.1  Even  delays  by  path  differences.  We  have  completed  the  de- 
scription of  the  direct  process  of  Section  2.4.2  (cf.  Sec.  2.6),  i.e.,  of 
the  process  that  operates  the  transfers  from  U  into  the  states  of  list 

(17)  .  We  noted  in  Section  2.6.3.2  that  the  direct  process  is  rigidly 
timed,  that  is,  that  each  state  of  (17)  calls  for  certain  stimuli  delivered 
at  definite  distances  in  time  from  each  other.  To  be  more  specific, 
to  get  from  S$  to  the  states  of  list  (17),  i.e.,  to  the  S2  with  2  from 
list  (18),  the  uninterrupted  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequences  of  list 

(18)  are  needed,  according  to  rule  (22).  These  are  certain  sequences 
of  lengths  three  and  four.  Since  we  actually  want  to  start  from  U, 
we  must  also  apply  rule  (21);  that  is,  we  must  have  one  stimulus 
immediately  before  this  sequence.  Hence  the  complete  requirement 
prescribes  certain  uninterrupted  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequences  of 
lengths  four  and  five. 

In  a  properly  organized  control  system  such  a  sequence  will  be 
induced  by  a  suitable  (single)  control  stimulus.  To  get  a  prescribed 
train  of  stimuli  during  four  or  five  consecutive  moments  t  {t  is  integer 
valued;  cf.  expression  (5)}  from  a  (single)  control  stimulus,  some 
multiple  delay  system  is  needed.  See  Figure  8.  If  the  (single)  control 
stimulus  appears  at  a  lattice  point  A,  and  if  the  prescribed  stimulus- 
no-stimulus  sequence  is  wanted  at  a  lattice  point  B,  then  it  is  neces- 
sary to  route  the  excitation  from  A  to  B  over  several  paths,  which 
produce,  relatively  to  each  other,  definite  delay  differences.  Indeed 
let  (P  be  the  path  from  A  to  B,  over  which  the  excitation  arrives  first 
to  B.  Then  the  other  paths  from  A  to  B,  say  (Pi ,  (P2 ,  •  •  •  ,  must 
produce  delays  against  (P  that  are  equal  to  the  distances  of  the  stimuli 
prescribed  in  the  desired  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequence  from  its 
first  stimulus  (the  one  required  by  rule  (21);  cf.  above).  Figure  8 
exemplifies  such  a  situation.  [The  delay  on  the  output  side  of  cell  A 
to  an  input  side  of  cell  B  is  7  along  path  (P,  17  along  path  (Pi ,  and  37 
along  path  (P2 .  If  these  paths  are  stimulated  at  time  zero,  stimuli  will 
enter  cell  B  at  times  7,  17,  and  37.] 

2.7.2.1  Odd  delays  and  single  delays.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  only 
even  delays  can  be  produced  in  this  manner:  the  lengths  of  any  two 
paths  connecting  two  given  points  A  and  B  differ  by  an  even  number. 
Yet  the  sequences  of  list  (18)  {as  required  by  list  (22)}  preceded  by  a 
(stimulus)  digit  1  {as  required  by  list  (21)}  may  contain  digits  1 
(i.e.,  stimuli)  at  odd  distances.  This  conflict  must  be  resolved.  The 
resolution  can  be  effected  in  various  ways. 

First,  the  principle  of  even  difference  of  lengths  between  paths 
connecting  the  same  two  points  depends  for  its  validity  on  the  crystal 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  147 

lattice  used.  It  holds  for  the  quadratic  lattice  that  we  use  here,  but 
it  fails  for  some  other  lattices.  We  might  therefore  consider  changing 
the  crystal  lattice. 

Second,  we  could  lengthen  the  sequences  of  list  (18)  by  inserting 
(no  stimulus)  digits  0,  so  as  to  make  all  the  distances  between  the 
(stimulus)  digits  1  {including  the  prefatory  1  required  by  rule  (21)} 
even.  This  would  increase  the  number  of  the  subsequences  encoun- 
tered in  building  up  the  sequences  of  list  (18),  i.e.,  the  number  of 
the  subsequences  according  to  list  (19).  Thus  there  would  have  to  be 
more  sensitized  states. 

Third,  we  can  introduce  the  odd  delays  directly.  It  is  clearly  suffi- 
cient to  introduce  a  single  delay.  This  means  that  we  need  an  excited 
state,  which  occurs  at  time  t,  not  after  a  stimulation  at  time  t  —  1 
(as  in  all  cases  so  far  considered,  i.e.,  for  T,  T',  C),  but  after  a  stimula- 
tion at  time  t  —  2. 

2.7.2,2  Single  delays  through  the  confluent  states.  A  closer  inspection 
indicates  that,  of  the  three  alternatives  described  in  Section  2.7.2.1, 
the  last  one  is  most  convenient,  and  particularly  most  economical 
with  respect  to  the  number  of  new  states  required.  In  this  connection 
two  additional  remarks  are  in  order. 

First,  it  suffices  to  supply  a  single  delay  mechanism  for  ordinary 
(T)  stimuli.  Indeed,  special  (T')  stimuli  can  be  obtained  from  the 
ordinary  ones  by  a  fixed  delay  conversion  process  {namely  (16)}. 
That  is,  if  a  rigidly  timed  sequence  (in  the  sense  of  Sec.  2.7.1)  of 
special  (T')  stimuli  is  wanted,  it  is  practical  to  produce  it  first  (with 
a  delay  system  according  to  Sec.  2.7.2.1)  with  ordinary  (T)  stimuli, 
and  then  convert  from  ordinary  to  special  {with  the  help  of  rule  (16)} 

Second,  in  order  to  introduce  a  single  delay  for  ordinary  stimuli, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  introduce  a  new  kind  of  state;  it  suffices  to 
utilize  and  expand  an  existing  kind.  Indeed,  it  is  quite  practical  to 
attribute  this  trait  to  C,  because  the  other  necessary  functions  of  C 
need  not  be  impaired  by  such  a  change. 

That  this  is  so  will  become  clear  in  the  course  of  our  actual  uses  of 
C.  For  the  present  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  formulating  those  changes 
in  the  rules  that  govern  the  behavior  of  C  which  are  needed  to 
introduce  the  desired  (single)  delay. 

At  present  the  excitation  of  C  is  described  by  rule  (11).  The 
stimulating  effect  of  C  is  described  by  rules  (12)  and  (16);  the 
"killing"  of  C  (i.e.,  its  transfer  into  U)  is  described  by  rule  (14). 

Under  these  rules  C  has  the  states  C£ ,  where  the  index  e  =  0,  1 
describes  the  present  state  of  excitation.  If  the  excitation  is  to  be 
delayed  by  a  single  time  unit,  then  C  must  remember  for  that  length 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


of  time  what  its  state  of  excitation  will  be  next.  Hence  two  indices, 
e.g.,  €,  e',  will  be  needed.  The  states  will  be  C€£>  ,  where  the  index 
€  =  0,  1  describes  the  present  state  of  excitation,  and  the  index 
e  =  0,  1  describes  the  next  state  of  excitation.  The  effects  on  rule 
(11),  and  on  rules  (12),  (14),  and  (16)  are  therefore  the  following. 

In  rule  (11):  where  C£  (for  t  —  1)  was  transferred  into  Ce>>  (for 
t),  now  CeC'  ,  (for  t  —  1)  should  be  transferred  into  Ce'e>>  (for  t). 

In  rules  (12),  (14),  and  (16):  the  role  of  Ct  (for  /  -  1)  is  taken 
over  by  Ctc>  ,  (for  I  —  1 ) . 

Furthermore,  it  is  natural  that  in  the  list  (17)  the  (quiescent) 
slate  Co  should  be  replaced  by  the  (completely  quiescent)  state  Coo . 

The  rigorous  statements  of  the  necessary  modifications  are  accord- 
ingly these: 

In  rule  (11)  replace  n#~l  =  C6  by  n#~l  =  C€C'  , 
replace  n#  =  Ci  by  n#  =  Ce'i ,  and 

(2°)    <  rePlace  n»  =  Cobyn/  =  Cc>0 . 

I  In  rules  (12)  and  (16)  replace  n^1  =  Ci  by  n#~l  =  Cw  ; 
in  rule  (14)  replace  n&~1  =  Cc  by  n#~l  =  CCC'  . 
In  list  (17)  replace  C0  by  Coo . 

To  conclude,  we  observe  that  with  this  method  of  introducing  a 
(single)  delay  we  replace  the  two  states  C6  by  the  four  states  Cce'  ; 
that  is,  we  introduced  two  new  states. 

2.8  Summary 

2.8.1  Rigorous  description  of  the  states  and  of  the  transition  rule. 
We  can  now  give  a  rigorous  summary,  i.e.,  a  complete  list  of  states 
and  an  exhaustive  transition  rule. 

Let  us  write  Tu  ,  u  =  0,  1,  in  place  of  T,  T',  respectively.  Corres- 
pondingly, let  us  call  the  ordinary  stimuli  and  the  special  stimuli 
stimuli  [0]  and  stimuli  [1],  respectively. 

The  enumeration  of  states  becomes  this : 
(S)  The  states: 

The  states  are  the  following  ones : 

The  transmission  states  Tuai  ,  where  u  =  0,  1  correspond  to  ordinary 
and  special;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3  to  right,  up,  left,  down;  e  =  0,  1  to  quiescent 
and  excited. 

The  confluent  states  Cee'  ,  where  e  =  0,  1  correspond  to  quiescent 
and  excited;  e  =  0,  1  to  next  quiescent  and  next  excited. 
The  unexcitable  state  U. 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE 




The  sensitized  states  Ss — where  2  has  the  range 

(5.1)  2  =  0,0,  1,00,01,  10,  11,000. 
In  addition,  the  Ss  with 

(5.2)  2  =  0000,  0001,  001,  010,  Oil,  100,  101,  110,  111, 
in  this  order,  are  identified  with 

(5.3)  Tua0  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3)  and  C00 

in  the  order  Tooo ,  Toio ,  T020 ,  T030 ,  T100 ,  Tno ,  T120 ,  T130 ,  Coo .  This  is 
a  total  of  16  (transmission)  +  4  (confluent)  +  1  (unexcitable)  + 
8  (sensitized)  =  29  states.  Hence 

(24)  N  =  29, 

and  the  symbols  Twa£  (u  =  0,  l;a  =  0, 1,2,3;  e  =  0,1),  Ce€,  (e  =  0,  1; 
e  =  0,  1),  U,  Ss  {2  according  to  (S.l)}  will  be  used  in  place  of  the  29 
number  values  in  expression  (6)  (cf.  the  remark  after  expressions  (6) 
and  (7)  in  Sec.  2.1.2). 

Let  us  now  consider  the  transition  rule.  First,  note  that  the  num- 
ber of  possibilities  for  this  rule  (i.e.,  for  the  function  F  in  the  sense 
of  Sec.  2.1.2)  is,  according  to  expression  (9)  with  N  =  29, 

(25)  29(295)  &  io30'000'000 

(with  three  significant  figures  in  the  exponent).  Second,  the  rules 
(10)- (16)  and  (21)- (23)  constitute  together  the  transition  rule, 
and  they  can  be  summarized  as  follows. 
(T)  The  transition  rule: 

Assume  n#~l  =  Tuae . 

(a)  n$  =  U    if  and  only  if    n^T1  =  Tu>a'i  , 
for  some     with  $  —  §'  =  va\    and  also  11  ^ 
u  . 

((3)  n/  =  Tuai  if  and  only  if  (a)  does  not  hold 
™  jv     ^  and  either  (a)  or  (b)  holds: 

J  (a)  n^T1  =  TMa'i    for  some  with 

#  -  y  =  va'  ^  -va. 

(b)  n^T1  =  Cu>    for  some  with 

#  -  y  =  /  ^  —  tF*o  =  0,  •••  ,3). 

(7)  n$  =  Tuao  if  and  only  if  neither  (a)  nor  (/3) 
holds. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Assume  n\  1  =  C«' 


t—i 


Tia'i  , 


(T.3) 


(T.4) 


(a)  n&  =  U    if  and  only  if 

for  some  &'  with  #  —      =  va' . 
(P)  n»  =  CC'i  if  and  only  if  (a)  does  not  hold 
and  both  (a)  and  (b)  hold: 
(T.2)    \  (a)  nli>1  =  T0«'i    for  some  0  with 

#  -  y  =  va\ 

(b)  Never  n^T1  =  T0a'o   for  an  &'  with 

#  -  y  = 

(7)        =  C€'o  if  and  only  if  neither  (a)  nor  (0) 
holds. 

Assume  n#_1  =  U. 

(a)  n&  =  Se    if  and  only  if   n^T1  =  Tu«'i , 

for  some  &  with  #  —  $  = 
(iS)  n^'  =  U  if  and  only  if  (a)  does  not  hold. 

Assume  ni'1  =  Ss  {with  2  according  to  list  (S.l)}. 
(a)  n#  =  Ssi    if  and  only  if   n^T1  =  Ttttt'i , 

for  some     with  &  —  ft'  =  va' . 
(/3)  n#  =  Sso  if  and  only  if  (a)  does  not  hold. 

2.8.2  Verbal  summary.  The  rigorous  summary  of  Section  2.8.1  is 
a  strict  restatement  of  the  verbal  formulations  and  conclusions 
arrived  at  in  Sections  2.2-2.7.  In  this  sense,  a  verbal  statement  of 
the  strict  and  formalistic  contents  of  Section  2.8.1  is  available  in 
those  sections.  However,  it  seems  desirable  to  give  at  this  point  a 
verbal  restatement  of  the  contents  of  Section  2.8.1,  i.e.,  of  its  descrip- 
tions of  the  states  and  of  the  transition  rule.  Indeed,  the  formalism 
of  Section  2.8.1  is  not  easy  to  follow  without  the  verbal  motivations 
of  Sections  2.2-2.7.  On  the  other  hand,  the  verbal  elaborations  of 
those  sections  are  lengthy  and  were  arrived  at  stepwise.  A  direct 
verbal  restatement  is  therefore  indicated. 

Such  a  restatement,  covering  the  states  and  the  transition  rule 
together,  is  given  in  what  follows. 

There  exist  16  transmission  states  Tuae .  The  index  u  indicates  the 
class  of  the  state:  u  =  0  for  ordinary  and  u  =  1  for  special.  The  index 
a  indicates  the  orientation  of  the  state:  a  =  0  for  right,  a  =  1  for 
up,  a  =  2  for  left,  and  a  =  3  for  down.  The  index  e  indicates  the  pres- 
ent state  of  excitation:  e  =  0  for  quiescent,  and  e  =  1  for  excited. 
A  transmission  state  has  one  output  direction  and  three  input  direc- 
tions: the  former  is  the  direction  defined  by  its  orientation;  the  latter 
are  all  the  others.  A  transmission  state  can  be  excited  with  a  delay  1, 
by  any  immediately  neighboring  excited  transmission  state  of  the 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  151 

same  class,  provided  that  the  former  lies  in  the  output  direction  of 
the  latter,  which  in  turn  must  be  lying  in  one  of  the  former's  input 
directions. 

There  exist  four  confluent  states  C€C'  .  The  index  e  indicates  the 
present  state  of  excitation,  the  index  e  indicates  the  next  state  of 
excitation:  e  or  e  =  0  for  quiescent,  and  e  or  e  =  1  for  excited.  The 
confluent  states  are  viewed  as  being  of  class  0.  For  a  confluent  state, 
all  directions  are  available  both  for  inputs  and  for  outputs.  [But  at 
any  given  time  a  direction  cannot  be  used  for  both  an  input  and  an 
output.]  A  confluent  state  can  be  excited  with  a  delay  2  by  those 
immediately  neighboring  transmission  states  of  its  own  class  (i.e.,  0) 
in  whose  output  direction  it  lies.  The  excitation  will  take  place  if 
there  exists  at  least  one  such  immediate  neighbor,  and  if  all  such 
immediate  neighbors  (whatever  their  number)  are  excited. 

A  transmission  state  (of  either  class)  can  also  be  excited  with  a 
delay  1  by  any  immediately  neighboring  excited  confluent  state, 
provided  that  the  latter  lies  in  one  of  the  former's  input  directions. 

There  exists  an  unexcitable  state  U.  This  state  is  viewed  as  quies- 
cent. Any  transmission  or  confluent  state  is  killed  (i.e.,  transferred 
into  the  unexcitable  state)  by  any  immediately  neighboring  excited 
transmission  state  of  the  opposite  class,  provided  that  the  former 
lies  in  the  latter 's  output  direction. 

All  the  above  states  (transmission  and  confluent)  go  into  their 
quiescent  forms  when  no  excitation  or  kill,  according  to  the  above 
rules,  is  provided  for. 

There  exist  eight  sensitized  states  Sz  ,  with  2  according  to  list  (S.l). 
We  will  also  use  the  symbol  Ss  with  2  according  to  list  (S.2),  but 
these  latter  states  are  not  considered  to  be  sensitized  ones.  They  are 
identified  with  the  quiescent  transmission  and  quiescent  confluent 
states  according  to  list  (S.3).  (For  the  references  to  lists  (S.1)-(S.3), 
cf.  Sec.  2.8.1.)  A  sensitized  state  Ss  will  in  any  case  undergo  a  change 
(immediately,  i.e.,  with  a  delay  1 ),  namely  into  Sso  or  S21  .  The  change 
into  S21  will  take  place  under  the  influence  of  any  immediately 
neighboring  excited  transmission  state  (of  either  class),  provided 
that  the  sensitized  state  lies  in  the  output  direction  of  the  latter. 
Otherwise,  a  change  into  S20  will  take  place. 

We  re-emphasize  that  this  last  mentioned  rule  applies  only  as  long 
as  the  state  is  sensitized,  i.e.,  as  long  as  2  is  according  to  list  (S.l), 
and  not  according  to  list  (S.2)  (i.e.,  as  long  as  it  has  not  reached  a 
maximum  size). 

[  2.8.3  Illustrations  of  the  transition  rule.  Each  cell  of  von  Neumann's 
infinite  cellular  structure  is  occupied  by  the  same  29-state  finite 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


automaton.  As  explained  in  Section  1.3.3.5,  an  "infinite  cellular 
automaton"  consists  of  this  infinite  cellular  structure  together  with 
an  initial  cell  assignment.  An  "initial  cell  assignment"  is  a  finite  list 
of  cells  together  with  an  assignment  of  a  state  to  each  cell  of  the  list; 
all  cells  not  in  the  list  are  assigned  the  unexcitable  state  U.  An  initial 
cell  assignment  determines  the  state  of  an  infinite  cellular  automaton 
at  time  zero.  The  history  of  the  infinite  cellular  automaton  is  then 
determined  by  the  transition  rule,  which  gives  the  state  of  each  29- 
state  finite  automaton  at  time  t  +  1  as  a  function  of  its  own  state 
and  the  states  of  its  four  immediate  neighbors  at  time  t. 

The  29  states  and  their  transition  rule  are  summarized  in  Figures 
9  and  10.  Von  Neumann  also  symbolized  pairs  of  transmission  states 
by  a  zero  (for  ordinary)  or  a  one  (for  special),  together  with  an  arrow 
indicating  the  output  direction.  For  example,  the  pair  of  states  T0oe 
is  represented  by  °> ,  while  Tn€  is  represented  by  1 1 . 

There  are  many  ways  of  viewing  the  29-state  automaton  which 
occupies  a  single  cell  of  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure.  It  can  be 
viewed  as  a  finite  automaton  which  is  constructed  from  switch  ele- 
ments and  delay  elements  and  which  is  connected  to  its  four  immediate 
neighbors  by  wires  crossing  its  four  boundaries.  In  what  follows  it  is 
more  fruitful  to  view  it  as  a  set  of  primitive  elements  (sub-automata) 
together  with  control  apparatus  for  switching  back  and  forth  among 
these  elements.  This  amounts  to  partitioning  the  29 -states  of  a  cell 
into  subsets  which  correspond  to  certain  functions. 

Consider  as  an  example  the  pair  of  transmission  states  T0oo  and 
Tooi ,  i.e.,  Too€  for  e  =  0,  1.  This  pair  of  states  functions  as  a  disjunc- 
tion (+  neuron)  feeding  a  unit  delay  whose  output  is  directed  to  the 
right.  The  potential  inputs  of  Too*  are  from  its  immediate  neighbors 
above  it,  to  its  left,  and  below  it.  These  inputs  come  from  confluent 
states  or  from  other  ordinary  transmission  states  which  are  directed 
toward  it.  Thus  in  Figure  11a,  the  cell  T0oe  behaves  as  follows.  If 
either  Cie'  or  Ton  at  t,  then  Tooi  at  t  +  1;  if  both  Coe'  and  T0io  at  t, 
then  Tooo  at  t  +  1.  In  other  words,  as  long  as  Figure  11a  is  limited 
to  the  states  shown  there,  the  two  states  Too*  can  be  thought  of  as 
constituting  a  disjunctive  element  with  inputs  from  the  left  and  be- 
low and  an  output  (after  unit  delay)  to  the  right  (at/). 

The  set  of  four  confluent  states  Ct€'  (e,  e  =  0,  1)  perform  the  func- 
tions of  conjunction  ("and",  "•"),  double  delay,  wire  branching 
(splitting),  and  conversion  of  ordinary  stimuli  into  special  stimuli; 
von  Neumann  also  symbolized  these  four  states  by  C.  These  states 
have  no  direction,  the  direction  of  their  functioning  being  determined 
by  the  directions  of  the  transmission  states  (both  ordinary  and 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE  153 

special)  in  the  four  immediately  neighboring  cells.  Consider  a  set  of 
states  C£t'  occupying  a  given  cell.  The  inputs  to  this  set  CeC'  are  from 
ordinary  transmission  states  directed  toward  it.  The  outputs  from 
this  set  CCC'  are  to  both  ordinary  and  special  transmission  states  not 
directed  toward  it.  See  Figures  lib  and  11c.  In  Figure  lib  the  cell 
CC€'  behaves  as  follows.  If  both  Tooi  and  Ton  at  t,  then  Ce'i  at  t  +  1 
and  Cie"  at  t  +  2;  if  either  Tooo  or  Toio  at  t,  then  CC'0  at  t  +  1  and 
Coe"  at  t  +  2.  In  other  words,  in  the  context  of  Figure  lib,  the  four 
states  Cet'  can  be  thought  of  as  constituting  a  conjunctive  element 
with  inputs  from  the  left  and  below  and  with  output  (after  two  units 
of  delay)  to  the  right  (at  g). 

It  is  convenient  to  think  of  the  state  e  of  a  Twa€  cell  or  a  Ccc>  cell 
as  its  output  state  at  a  given  time,  and  to  think  of  the  composite 
state  of  its  immediate  neighbors  as  its  input  state  at  that  time.  It  is 
also  convenient  to  use  short  bars  to  indicate  an  input  to  a  cell  (a,  6,  c, 
d,  and  e  of  Fig.  11)  or  as  output  from  a  cell  (/,  g,  h,  i,  and  j  of  Fig. 
11).  Under  this  convention,  we  have  for  Figure  1 1 : 

f(t  +  3)  =  [a(t)  +  b(t  +  1)] 

g(t  +  S)  =  [c(t)-d(t)] 

h(t  +  4)  =  e(t) 

i(t  +  5)  =  e(t) 

j(«  +  4)  =  e(t). 

All  the  outputs  are  ordinary  stimuli  except  that  the  output  j  is  a 
special  stimulus. 

Each  switching  function  (truth  function)  of  disjunction  (+)  and 
conjunction  (•)  can  be  realized,  with  suitable  delay,  by  a  cellular 
network  of  ordinary  states  (Toac  and  C«')«  Storage  loops  may  be 
made  of  ordinary  states.  In  Figure  12  the  loop  Bl,  B2,  A2,  Al  stores 
the  sequence  10000,  which  will  cycle  around  the  square  ad  infinitum, 
continually  feeding  into  cell  Cl .  Negation  is  not  represented  directly 
in  the  29  states  but  is  synthesized  from  the  destructive  (reverse )  and 
constructive  (direct)  processes.  See  Section  3.2.2  and  Figure  17  below. 

The  direct  process  changes  a  cell  from  the  unexcitable  state  U  into 
one  of  the  nine  quiescent  states  TMa0  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3)  or 
Coo .  Transmission  states  (ordinary  or  special)  directed  toward  U 
initiate  and  control  the  direct  process,  and  sensitized  states  serve  as 
intermediaries.  Any  (or  several)  Tuai  directed  toward  U  converts  it 
to  Se  .  Thereafter  Ss  is  followed  by  (a)  Ssi  if  some  Twai  is  directed 
toward  the  cell,  (b)  Sso  otherwise,  until  the  direct  process  terminates 
in  a  Twa0  or  Coo  in  accordance  with  Figure  10.  For  example,  when 
sent  into  a  cell  which  is  in  state  U,  the  sequence  10000  produces 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Tooo,  the  sequence  1011  produces  Tioo ,  and  the  sequence  1111  pro- 
duces Coo . 

The  direct  process  is  illustrated  in  Figure  12.  As  indicated  by  the 
subscripts  (values  of  e  and  e'),  the  loop  Bl,  B2,  A2,  Al,  stores  the 
sequence  10000  in  that  order  at  time  zero.  This  sequence  will  cycle 
around  the  loop  ad  infinitum,  repeatedly  feeding  into  cell  Cl.  It 
will  pass  through  cell  Cl  with  a  unit  delay.  Its  effect  on  cell  Dl  through 
time  is  as  follows: 

Time:  0     12     3     4      5       6  7 

Input  to  Dl:    0     1     0     0     0      0       1  0 
State  of  Dl:     U    U    Se    So    Soo    Sooo    Tooo    Tooi    •  •  •  . 

The  process  will  now  repeat,  with  cell  Dl  feeding  the  sequence  10000 
into  the  cell  on  its  right,  causing  it  to  pass  through  the  sequence 
S* ,  So ,  Soo ,  Sooo ,  Tooo ,  Tooi ,  •  •  •  .  This  process  will  again  repeat, 
ad  infinitum.  Thus  an  infinite  cellular  automaton  which  has  the  first 
pattern  of  Figure  12  as  its  initial  cell  assignment  will  grow  an  ever 
lengthening  communication  channel  0>  Z  t  •  •  •  to  the  right. 

The  reverse  process  (destruction,  killing)  changes  any  transmission 
state  Tuat  and  any  confluent  state  Cce>  into  U.  An  excited  ordinary 
transmission  state  T0ai  kills  a  special  transmission  state  Tiae  toward 
which  it  is  directed,  and  an  excited  special  transmission  state  Tiai 
kills  an  ordinary  transmission  state  Toa€  or  confluent  state  Ccc> 
toward  which  it  is  directed.  Examples  are  given  in  Figure  13.  In 
Figures  13a  and  13b  cells  shown  with  question  marks  at  time  1  are 
so  marked  because  their  states  at  this  time  depend  on  the  states  of 
the  cells  in  the  surrounding  environment.  Except  for  Figures  13a 
and  13b,  we  always  assume  that  the  finite  cellular  arrays  of  our  figures 
are  not  affected  by  the  direct  or  reverse  process  operating  on  them 
from  the  environment.  Note  that  the  special  and  ordinary  transmis- 
sion states  of  Figure  13b  kill  each  other. 

The  reverse  process  dominates  reception.  If  a  "kill"  stimulus  enters 
a  cell  at  time  t,  that  cell  will  be  in  state  U  at  time  t  +  1,  no  matter 
what  other  stimuli  may  have  entered  the  cell  at  time  t.  On  the  other 
hand,  killing  does  not  dominate  emission,  in  the  sense  that  if  a  cell  is 
prepared  to  emit  a  stimulus  at  time  t  it  will  in  fact  emit  that  stimulus, 
even  though  it  also  receives  a  kill  stimulus  at  time  t.  We  will  illustrate 
these  facts  with  Figure  13c. 

Assume  in  Figure  13c  that  ordinary  stimuli  enter  input  a  at  times  0 
and  1 ,  a  special  stimulus  enters  input  c  at  time  1 ,  and  no  other  stimuli 
enter  the  figure  at  any  other  time.  The  ordinary  stimulus  entering  a 
at  time  0  enters  cell  Bl  at  time  1,  leaves  cell  Bl  at  time  2,  and  leaves 


SYSTEM  OF  29  STATES  WITH  A  TRANSITION  RULE 




cell  Cl  (output  b)  at  time  3.  The  special  stimulus  which  enters  input 
c  at  time  1  enters  cell  Bl  at  time  2,  causing  cell  Bl  to  be  in  state  U 
at  time  3.  The  ordinary  stimulus  entering  a  at  time  1  enters  cell  Bl 
at  time  2,  but,  since  the  special  kill  stimulus  also  enters  cell  Bl  at 
time  1,  the  ordinary  stimulus  has  no  effect.  Hence  the  first  ordinary 
stimulus  into  input  a  is  transmitted  through  cells  Al,  Bl,  Cl  and  is 
emitted  from  output  6,  but  the  second  ordinary  stimulus  into  input  a 
is  dominated  by  the  kill  stimulus  from  input  c  and  is  lost. 

One  fundamental  construction  in  the  cellular  system  is  to  change 
the  state  of  a  remote  cell  by  the  direct  process  and  then  wipe  out  the 
constructing  path  used  for  the  construction.  The  technique  is  illus- 
trated in  Figure  14.  Ordinary  stimuli  are  fed  alternately  into  inputs 
i  and  j,  they  travel  along  the  path  B2-D2,  and  cell  D3  is  left  in  the 
quiescent  state.  The  sequences  required  are  as  follows  (cf.  Fig.  10). 
(a)  Input  i  is  supplied  with  10000,  10000,  1010,  and  1111.  The  path 
B2-D2  becomes  an  ordinary  transmission  channel,  and  cell  D3  is 
left  in  the  desired  state  C,  as  in  Figure  14b.  (b)  Input  j  is  supplied 
with  1,1011;  1,1011;  and  1.  The  cells  B2  and  C2  become  U,  Se  ,  S0 ,  Soi 
and  Son  (i.e.,  Tioo)  in  turn.  The  cell  D2  becomes  U,  as  in  Figure  14c. 
(c)  The  sequence  1,10000,  and  1  into  i  produces  Figure  14d.  (d) 
Finally,  the  single  stimulus  1  into  j  produces  Figure  14e.  Thus  we 
are  left  with  cell  D3  in  the  desired  state  and  with  the  constructing 
path  B2-D2  in  the  unexcitable  state. 

The  transformations  of  Figure  14  require  37  time  steps,  measuring 
time  from  the  input  sides  of  cell  B2.  As  described  above,  stimuli  come 
from  inputs  i  and  j  alternately,  but,  since  the  absence  of  a  stimulus  is 
represented  by  "0,"  we  can  think  of  a  sequence  of  length  37  going 
into  cell  B2  via  input  i  and  a  simultaneous  sequence  of  length  37 
going  into  cell  B2  via  input  j.  The  path  from  input  j  to  cell  B2  re- 
quires 2  more  units  of  time  than  the  path  from  input  i  to  cell  B2; 
hence  the  input  to  j  must  lead  the  input  to  i  by  2  units  of  time.  Con- 
sequently, the  transformation  from  Figure  14a  to  Figure  14e  will  be 
brought  about  by  the  two  36-bit  sequences  of  ordinary  stimuli  shown 
at  the  bottom  of  Figure  14;  in  these  sequences  time  goes  from  left  to 
right.  The  sequence  for  input  i  may  be  obtained  by  prefixing  i  with  a 
sequence  of  36  cells  in  states  Too* ,  each  e  being  chosen  according  to 
the  needed  input  into  i.  Likewise,  the  sequence  for  input  j  may  be 
obtained  by  prefixing  j  with  a  sequence  of  36  cells  in  the  appropriate 
Tooc  states. 

The  above  technique  may  be  used  to  construct  an  arbitrary  finite 
array  d  of  quiescent  cells,  i.e.,  cells  in  the  states  U,  Twa0  (u  =  0,  1; 
a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  or  Coo .  For  each  such  array  (2,  there  are  two  binary 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


sequences  of  stimuli  which,  when  fed  into  inputs  i  and  j  of  Figure  14, 
will  produce  the  array  &  to  the  right.  Moreover,  these  two  sequences 
will  emanate  from  two  linear  arrays  of  cells  in  the  states  T0o€ ,  with 
the  e's  properly  chosen.  These  two  linear  arrays,  together  with  cells 
Al,  A4,  B1-B4  of  Figure  14  constitute  an  array  (B.  Thus  we  have  the 
following  result  about  constructions  in  von  Neumann's  cellular 
structure:  for  each  quiescent  finite  array  Ct,  there  is  a  finite  array  (B 
and  a  time  r  such  that  array  Ct  will  appear  at  time  r  in  the  infinite 
cellular  automaton  which  has  (B  as  its  initial  cell  assignment.  More- 
over, the  limitation  that  the  cells  of  array  &  be  quiescent,  while 
important  (cf.  Sec.  1.6.3.2  above),  is  not  serious,  for  the  array  (B 
can  impart  a  starting  stimulus  to  array  &  before  returning  the  con- 
structing path  to  the  unexcitable  state. 

It  is  clear  from  the  previous  construction  that  area  (B  is  always 
larger  (contains  more  cells)  than  CL  Compare  Section  1.6.1.1  above. 
Von  Neumann  circumvents  this  difficulty  by  designing  a  universal 
constructing  automaton  D  and  attaching  to  it  a  tape  description  of 
itself  LD  ;  see  Section  1.6.1.2  above.  This  universal  constructing 
automaton  will  have,  among  other  powers,  the  power  of  a  universal 
Turing  machine.  The  technique  of  Figure  14  will  play  an  essential 
role  in  the  operation  of  this  universal  constructing  automaton  C. 
See  Chapters  4  and  5  below.] 


Chapter 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 


3.1  Introduction 

3.1.1  Free  and  rigid  timing,  periodic  repetition,  and  phase  stop. 
The  organs  that  will  be  constructed  in  the  sections  that  follow  will 
exhibit  two  relevant  traits  (separately  or  jointly):  free  timing  and 
rigid  timing. 

We  have  free  timing  when  the  emission  of  certain  stimuli  (at  a 
specified  point  and  in  a  certain  order)  is  provided  for,  but  the  time 
intervals  or  delays  from  one  such  emission  to  the  next  are  not  pre- 
scribed. 

We  have  rigid  timing  when  the  delays  of  the  above  pattern  are 
numerically  specified.  We  may  alternatively  express  this  by  stating 
that  these  delay  periods  are  filled  with  "no  stimuli."  (Clearly  there 
will  be  d  —  1  of  these  for  a  delay  period  between  a  prescribed  stimu- 
lus and  its  successor,  if  the  specified  delay  between  these  two  is  d.) 
The  rigidly  timed  sequence  of  stimuli  can  therefore  also  be  described 
as  a  "stimulus-no-simulus  sequence"  of  uninterruptedly  consecutive 
events.  In  this  form  it  will  be  designated  by  a  sequence  of  O's  and  l's, 
each  1  standing  for  a  "stimulus,"  and  each  0  for  a  "no  stimulus": 
ft  ...  jn  (each  iv  =  0,  1).  Whenever  this  notation  i1  •  •  •  in  is  used, 
rigid  timing  is  implied. 

[The  direct  process  of  Section  2.6.3.2  above  involves  rigid  timing. 
As  von  Neumann  said  there,  in  rigid  timing  "the  absence  of  a  stimu- 
lus has  as  definite  an  effect  as  the  presence  of  one,  and  therefore  the 
stimuli  that  are  required  must  be  delivered  at  definite  times,  without 
any  delays  other  than  the  expressly  required  ones." 

As  we  saw  in  Section  1.3.3.5,  there  is  no  bound  on  the  number  of 
cells  which  can  be  in  the  excited  state  at  any  given  time,  though  of 
course  this  number  is  always  finite.  Thus  von  Neumann's  cellular 
structure  allows  for  an  indefinite  amount  of  parallelism.  But  in  de- 
signing his  self -reproducing  automaton  von  Neumann  did  not  make 
much  use  of  the  potential  parallelism  of  his  cellular  structure.  Rather, 
his  self -reproducing  automaton  works  like  a  serial  digital  computer, 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


with  most  organs  normally  quiescent.  In  this  respect  it  is  similar  to 
the  ED  VAC  (see  pp.  9-11  above). 

When  an  organ  of  the  self -reproducing  automaton  is  stimulated  by 
a  sequence  containing  one  or  more  stimuli,  the  organ  will  produce  an 
output  (response)  after  a  delay.  Usually  the  delay  between  input 
and  output  doesn't  matter,  because  no  other  construction  or  com- 
putation is  going  on  simultaneously.  Likewise,  the  delay  between 
one  input  to  an  organ  and  the  next  input  to  that  organ  does  not  usually 
matter,  provided  that  this  delay  is  sufficiently  great  for  the  organ 
to  finish  one  action  before  starting  the  next.  The  main  exception  to 
these  statements  concerns  the  tape  unit  of  Chapter  4  below.  The 
method  von  Neumann  used  for  lengthening  and  shortening  the  tape 
requires  simultaneous  (parallel)  action  in  two  connecting  loops.] 

By  a  periodic  repetition  of  such  a  sequence  il  •  •  •  in  a  rigidly  timed 
periodic  repetition  is  meant,  i.e.,  one  with  uninterruptedly  consecutive 
periods  il  •  •  •  in,  unless  the  opposite  is  expressly  stated.  Thus  a  periodi- 
cally repeated  il  •  •  •  in,  to  be  designated  i1  •  •  •  in,  means  il  •  •  •  inil  •  •  • 

inil  -  -  -  in   Such  periodic  repetitions  are  never  intended  to 

go  on  indefinitely.  By  a  stop  in  phase  k  (=  1,  •  •  •  ,  n)  in  period  s 
(=  1,2,  •  •  • ),  we  mean  that  the  sequence  is  interrupted  immediately 
before  the  ik  in  the  s-th  period  (i.e.,  no  stimuli  are  emitted  at  this 
time  or  later).  We  may  also  call  this  a  stop  at  step  I  with  I  =  nx  +  k 
(I  =  1,2,  •  •  • ).  By  a  stop  in  period  s  (without  stating  a  phase)  we 
mean  one  in  phase  1  (i.e.,  at  step  ns  +  1 ). 

8.1.2  Construction  of  organs,  simple  and  composite.  We  will  now 
construct  successively  certain  organs,  going  from  the  simpler  to  the 
more  complicated.  Most  of  these  organs  will  be  composites  of  previ- 
ously defined  organs  with  each  other  and  with  suitable  controlling 
and  connecting  networks.  Each  one  of  the  organs  to  be  defined  will 
be  given  a  name  and  a  symbol,  so  that  it  can  be  identified  when  it 
occurs  as  a  part  of  a  subsequent  larger,  composite  organ. 

[In  some  cases  von  Neumann  gave  algorithms  for  designing  any 
organ  of  a  given  class;  this  is  so  for  pulsers  (Sec.  3.2),  decoding 
organs  (Sec.  3.3),  and  coded  channels  (Sec.  3.6).  In  the  case  of  the 
triple-return  counter  (Sec.  3.4)  and  the  1  vs.  10101  discriminator 
(Sec.  3.5),  he  designed  specific  organs.  To  make  von  Neumann's 
algorithms  and  constructions  easier  to  follow,  we  discuss  a  completed 
organ  at  the  beginning  of  each  section. 

Since  von  Neumann  was  interested  in  an  existence  proof  of  self- 
reproduction  he  did  not,  in  general,  attempt  to  minimize  his  design.] 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




3.2  Pulsers 


3.2.1  The  pulser:  structure,  dimensions,  and  timing. 

[  Figure  15  shows  two  pulsers  designed  according  to  von  Neumann's 
algorithm.  We  will  explain  how  they  work. 

A  stimulus  (e.g.,  Tooi)  into  input  a  of  pulser  P(lll)  at  time  t  is 
split  at  each  confluent  element  and  produces  a  sequence  111  from 
output  b  at  times  t  +  9,  t  +  10,  and  2+11.  The  cross-hatched 
cell  is  in  the  unexcitable  state  U. 

The  characteristic  10010001  contains  three  ones,  so  three  paths  (B, 
D,  and  F)  are  needed  for  P  (10010001),  with  relative  delays  0,  3,  and 
7,  respectively.  The  confluent  cells  along  the  bottom  produce  relative 
delays  of  0,  1,  and  2,  respectively.  Additional  delays  are  achieved 
in  two  ways.  Replacing  two  ordinary-up  transmission  states  by  a 
block  like  C5,  C6,  D5,  and  D6  adds  two  units  of  delay  to  a  path; 
by  this  means  we  get  relative  delays  of  0,  3,  and  6  in  the  three  paths. 
Replacing  an  ordinary  transmission  state  in  row  2  by  a  confluent 
state  (e.g.,  F2)  adds  a  unit  of  delay  to  a  path;  in  this  way  we  ob- 
tain relative  delays  of  0,  3,  and  7  in  the  three  paths  B,  D,  and  F, 
respectively.] 

We  begin  with  the  pulser.  This  organ  has  an  input  a  and  an  output 
b.  Upon  a  stimulus  at  a  it  will  emit  a  prescribed  sequence  i  •  •  •  in  at  b. 

The  relation  between  the  stimulus  at  a  and  the  response  at  b  is 
freely  timed;  i.e.,  the  delay  between  these  is  not  prescribed  at  this 
point  (cf.,  however,  the  remarks  at  the  end  of  this  subsection). 
This  pulser  has  the  symbol  J*(il  •••  in).  The  sequence  il  •••  in, 
which  can  be  prescribed  at  will,  is  its  characteristic;  n  is  its  order. 

The  principles  involved  in  constructing  a  pulser  are  quite  simple. 
The  actual  network  is  successively  developed  in  Figure  16.  This 
construction  and  the  network  that  results  from  it  will  be  discussed 
in  the  balance  of  this  section. 

Let  vi  ,  •  •  •  ,  vk  be  the  v  for  which  iv  =  1,  i.e.,  the  positions  of 
the  stimuli  in  the  sequence  i1  •  •  •  in.  Then  1  <>  v\  <  V2  <  •  •  •  <  pjc  S  n> 
Hence  vh  ^  h.  Write 


The  input  stimulus  at  a  must  be  broken  up,  or  rather  multiplexed 
into  k  distinct  stimuli,  numbers  h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k,  arriving  at  b  with  the 
relative  delays  ¥h  (h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k),  respectively. 

Consider  first  the  network  of  Figure  16a.  A  stimulus  arriving  at  a 


where  pn  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  ;  rn  =  0,  1. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


has  k  paths  available  to  reach  b:  on  path  number  h(h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k) 
it  goes  horizontally  from  a  to  the  C  number  h,  then  it  turns  vertically 
up,  ascends  to  the  top  line,  and  continues  there  horizontally  to  b. 
There  are  (2h  -  1)  +  u  +  (2(k  -  h)  +  1)  =  2k  +  u  steps,  but, 
since  h  of  them  are  C's,  the  entire  delay  involved  is  (2k  +  u)  +  h. 
That  is,  path  number  h  has  the  relative  delay  (relatively  to  the 
other  paths!)  h. 

Note  that  this  network  has  the  width  2k  —  1,  but  that  its  height 
u  +  2  is  still  undetermined,  along  with  u. 

We  must  now  replace  the  relative  delay  h  of  the  path  number  h 
in  Figure  16a  by  a  relative  delay  vh  (for  each  h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k)  \  i.e., 
we  must  increase  it  by  vh  —  h  =  2\xh  +  rh  {cf.  formula  (l')}.  We 
replace  therefore  each  one  of  the  k  vertical  branches  in  Figure  16a 
by  a  suitable  delay  network,  say  branch  number  h  by  a  network 
Nh  ,  as  shown  in  Figure  16b.  (We  have  also  moved  input  a  one  step 
left,  by  placing  a  °  before  the  first  C.)  Hence  Nh  must  produce  a 
delay  2fxh  +  rh  . 

Nh  is  showTn  again  in  Figure  16c,  indicating  its  input  Ch  and  its 
output  dh  .  (ch  is  immediately  above  the  C  number  h,  dh  above  this, 
under  the  top  line,  i.e.,  immediately  below  the  !t  number  2h  —  1 
in  the  top  line.)  To  achieve  the  desired  delay  2/u  +  rh  ,  Nh  may  be 
built  up  by  stacking  ^  delay-two  blocks  vertically,  plus  a  single 
delay-one  block  if  =  1.  The  former  are  shown  in  Figure  16d;  their 
height  is  2.  The  latter  is  shown  in  Figure  16e;  its  height  is  1.  The 
total  height  of  Nh  is  then  adjusted  to  the  uniform  value  u  by  in- 
serting an  ordinary  vertical  ascent  of  length  u  —  2\ih  —  rh  =  u  — 
(vh  —  h)  =  Sh  {cf.  formula  (l')}.  This  is  shown  in  Figure  16f.  (The 
delays  referred  to  above  are,  of  course,  always  relative  ones,  compared 
to  an  ordinary  vertical  ascent.)  It  is  best  to  put  the  ixh  blocks  of 
Figure  16d  at  the  bottom  of  Nh,  the  (possible,  single)  block  of 
Figure  16e  at  the  top  of  Nh  ,  and  the  vertical  insertion  of  Figure  16f 
in  between.  The  reason  for  this  last  precaution  is  that  a  C  of  Figure 
16e  must  never  be  in  contact  with  a  transmission  state  of  Figure 
16d,  since  this  might  produce  unwanted  stimulations.  The  U-padding 
in  Figures  16e  and  16f  is  such  that  the  contact  in  question  could 
occur  only  between  Figures  16e  and  16d,  and  then  only  with  the 
latter  to  the  right  of  the  former.  Hence  the  top  line  of  the  Nh  (h  =  1 , 
•  •  •  ,  k)  must  contain  no  Figure  16d  block  immediately  to  the  right 
of  a  Figure  16e  block. 

In  view  of  all  this  we  have,  therefore,  these  conditions:  always 
u  ^  Vh  —  h.  If  some  n  =  1  (i.e.,  Vh  —  h  odd,  i.e.,  some  Fig.  16e 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




block  in  the  top  line),  and  the  maximum  of  vh  —  h  is  even,  then 
u  >  vh  —  h  for  every  h.  In  other  words:  u  ^  u,  where 


(2') 


u  =  Max  (vn  —  h)  +  €°, 

h=l,  •  •  •, 

where  e°  =  1  if  the  Max  is  even  but  some  vh  —  h  is  odd, 
and  e°  =  0  otherwise. 


It  is,  of  course,  simplest  to  put  u  =  u°. 

[This  rule  is  wrong  when  vk  —  k  =  1,  as  in  P(1010),  for  a  con- 
fluent state  in  the  bottom  row  cannot  directly  drive  a  confluent 
state  above  it.  This  oversight  may  be  corrected  in  different  ways. 
We  correct  it  by  adding  the  following  restriction  to  von  Neumann's 
rule  (2'): 

If  vk  —  k  =  1,  then  u  =  2. 

Note  that  Max  (vh  —  h)  =  vk  —  k. 

Von  Neumann  introduced  e°  because  he  did  not  want  a  Figure  16d 
to  be  immediately  to  the  right  of  a  Figure  16e,  since  the  confluent 
state  of  the  latter  figure  would  affect  an  ordinary  transmission  state 
of  the  former  figure.  However,  if  Figure  16e  is  in  the  next  to  the  top 
row  of  the  pulser,  and  Figure  16d  occupies  this  row  and  the  row 
below  it,  this  effect  does  not  in  fact  change  the  output  of  the  pulser. 
We  could  therefore  replace  von  Neumann's  design  algorithm  by  a 
new  algorithm  with  this  simpler  rule  for  determining  u: 

If  Vk  —  k  =  1,  then  u  =  2 

Otherwise,  u  =  vk  —  k. 

We  will  not  make  this  replacement,  however,  since  we  wish  to  keep 
as  close  to  von  Neumann's  original  design  as  possible.] 

This  completes  the  construction.  As  Figure  16b  shows,  the  area  of 
this  network  has  the  width  2k  and  the  height  u  +  2.  An  abbreviated 
representation  of  this  network  is  given  in  Figure  16g. 

Note  that  the  sequence  il  •  •  •  in,  i.e.,  the  relative  delays  vh  (h  = 
1,  •  •  •  ,  k),  is  achieved  with  a  certain  preliminary  absolute  delay. 
We  saw  that  this  was  2k  +  u  under  the  conditions  of  Figure  16a.  The 
insertion  of  the  *L  before  the  first  C  in  Figure  16b  raises  this  to  2k  + 
u  +  1.  Thus  in  the  final  arrangement,  represented  by  Figure  16g, 
a  stimulus  at  a  starts  the  sequence  il  •  •  •  in  after  a  preliminary 
[absolute]  delay  2k  +  u  +  1  at  b.  (This  means  that  the  first  stimulus 
or  no-stimulus  position  of  that  sequence,  i1,  has  a  delay  2k  +  u  +  2.) 

If  input  a  is  stimulated  several  times,  the  emissions  at  b  take  place 
concurrently,  irrespectively  of  whether  the  sequences  i1  •  •  •  in  that 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


are  so  induced  overlap  or  not.  That  is,  there  is  no  corruption  by 
interference  in  this  network. 

[We  will  summarize  the  external  characteristics  of  the  pulser 
P(il  ~  in).  See  Figure  16g. 

The  width  of  the  pulser  is  2k,  where  k  is  the  number  of  ones  in  the 
characteristic  il  •  •  •  in.  Von  Neumann  implicitly  assumed  that 
k  ^  2;  for  k  =  0  or  k  =  1  no  organ  is  needed. 

The  height  of  the  pulser  is  u  +  2,  where  u  is  defined  as  follows: 
vi  ,  •  •  •  ,  vk  are  the  v  for  which  f  =  1.  Von  Neumann's  rule  for  u, 
as  corrected,  is 

If  Vk  —  k  =  1,  then  u  =  2. 

Otherwise,  u  =  (vk  —  k)  +  e,  where 

e°  =  1  if  (v/c  —  k)  is  even  but  some  vk  —  h  (h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k)  is 
odd, 

e°  =  0  otherwise. 

Note  that  k  is  the  number  of  ones  in  the  characteristic  and  that 
vk  is  the  superscript  of  the  rightmost  one;  hence  ^  —  A;  is  the  total 
number  of  zeros  in  the  sequence  preceding  the  rightmost  one  of  the 
characteristic. 

The  delay  between  the  input  pulse  going  into  a  and  the  first 
output  i  emerging  from  b  is  2k  +  u  +  2.] 

3.2.2  The  periodic  pulser:  structure,  dimensions,  timing,  and  the 
PP  (I)  form. 

[  Figure  17  shows  two  pulsers  designed  according  to  the  algorithm 
von  Neumann  developed  next.  

The  periodic  pulser  PP  (10010001 )  is  constructed  from  a  pulser 
P  (10010001 )  which  produces  one  occurrence  of  the  desired  sequence, 
a  periodic  repeater  G4--G6  and  H^-H6  of  period  eight,  a  mechanism 
H1-H3  for  turning  the  repeater  off,  and  a  pulser  P  (1111111111) 
which  produces  the  signals  needed  for  turning  the  repeater  off. 

A  "start"  stimulus  into  input  a+  at  time  t  will  produce  10010001 
from  an  output  b'  of  P  (10010001 )  at  times  t  +  29  through  t  +  36. 
The  sequence  10010001  is  emitted  repeatedly  from  output  b  until 
the  repeater  is  turned  off.  A  "stop"  stimulus  into  input  a_  will  cause 
the  top  pulser  to  emit  a  sequence  of  10  ones.  These  will  pass  through 
the  confluent  state  H2,  the  special  transmission  state  H3,  and  into 
cell  m.  The  first  five  pulses  will  induce  the  transformation  C€e'  — ► 
U  — ->  %  — >  Si  — >  Sn  — >  Sin  (=  Coo),  and  the  last  five  pulses  will 
repeat  this  transformation.  No  matter  what  the  contents  of  the 
periodic  repeater  are,  they  will  be  wiped  out.  Note  in  this  connection 
that  since  a  sequence  of  ones  is  used  to  turn  the  repeater  off,  any 
ones  entering  cell  H4  from  the  left  (i.e.,  from  the  repeater  itself)  are 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




ineffectual.  This  is  a  motive  for  putting  the  confluent  state  at  the 
bottom  of  the  periphery  of  the  tree  of  Figure  10. 

Since  the  periodic  pulser  PP(T)  is  used  very  often,  von  Neumann 
elected  to  simplify  the  design  for  this  special  case.  Here  he  used  the 
fact  that,  when  Figure  17b  is  operating,  there  is  a  sequence  of  six 
ones  in  its  periodic  repeater.  Once  the  transformation  of  the  confluent 
state  E3  is  begun  by  a  pulse  from  E2  the  transformation  is  completed 
by  the  four  ones  remaining  in  the  periodic  repeater  (two  ones  being 
lost  when  E3  is  killed).  This  periodic  pulser  does  not,  however, 
work  in  all  contexts.  See  the  editorial  discussion  at  the  end  of  this 
subsection.] 

The  next  organ  that  we  construct  is  the  periodic  pulser.  This  organ 
has  two  inputs  a+  ,  a_  ,  and  an  output  b.  Upon  a  stimulus  at  a+  it 
will  begin  to  emit  a  prescribed,  periodically  repeated  sequence,  say 
i1  •  •  •  in  at  b.  Upon  a  stimulus  at  a_  this  emission  at  b  will  be  stopped. 

The  relation  between  the  stimuli  at  a+  and  a_  and  the  (starting  or 
stopping  of  the)  response  at  b  is  freely  timed;  i.e.,  the  two  delays 
between  these  are  not  prescribed  at  this  point  (cf.,  however,  the  re- 
marks at  the  end  of  this  section) .   

This  periodic  pulser  has  the  symbol  PP^'1  •  •  •  in).  The  sequence 
il  •  •  •  in,  which  can  be  prescribed  at  will,  is  its  characteristic;  n  is  its 
order. 

The  required  network  is  successively  developed  in  Figure  18.  This 
construction  and  the  network  that  results  from  it  are  discussed  in 
the  balance  of  this  section. 

The  operation  of  producing  the  periodically  repeated  sequence 
il  •  •  •  in  is  best  decomposed  into  two  suboperations.  First,  we  produce 
a  single  sequence  il  •  •  •  in;  second,  we  repeat  it  periodically.  The 
first  task  calls  for  the  pulser  P(ix  •  •  •  in)  of  Section  3.2.1,  according 
to  Figure  16g.  We  write  a\  b'  for  a,  b  there.  Then  our  present  input 
a+  must  either  feed  into  or  be  the  input  a \  The  second  task  requires 
attaching  to  the  output  b'  an  organ  that  will  repeat  any  period  of 
length  n  to  the  output  b. 

The  simplest  periodic  repeater  is  a  (closed)  cycle  of  transmission 
states.  The  shortest  cycle  of  this  kind  has  a  period  4,  as  shown  in 
Figure  18a.  Clearly  any  [such]  cycle  must  have  an  even  period;  hence 
the  general  cycle  has  the  period  2f,  I  =  2,  3,  •  •  •  .A  cycle  of  this  pe- 
riod is  shown  in  Figure  18b. 

Our  present  output  b  must  issue  from  this  repeater.  Hence  at  least 
one  of  its  cells  must  be  able  to  stimulate  in  two  directions  (6,  as 
well  as  its  own  successor  in  the  cycle) ;  i.e.,  it  must  be  a  C.  The  output 
b  has  two  possible  positions  on  this  C :  bi  ,  62 . 


1G4 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


This  is  shown  in  Figure  18c.  The  C  raises  the  length  of  the  period 
to  2t  +  1.  This  is  an  odd  period.  If  an  even  period  is  wanted,  a  second 
C  must  be  inserted  (since  the  first  one  cannot  be  removed).  This  is 
shown  in  Figure  18d;  the  period  length  is  here  21  +  2.  (Note  that 
the  two  C  are  not  immediate  neighbors,  since  a  C  cannot  stimulate 
a  C.)  Both  alternatives  are  jointly  represented  by  Figure  18e,  where 

(  =  o  for  r  =  1. 

X 

(  =  C  for  r  =  2. 

Here  the  period  is  n  =  21  +  r,  where  I  =  2,  3,  •  •  •  ;  r  =  1,  2.  That 
is,  we  can  handle  precisely  the  orders  (periods)  n  =  5,  6,  •  •  •  . 
Thus  the  order  n  is  subject  to  the  condition 

(3r)  n  ^  5. 

If  the  condition  (3')  is  violated,  i.e.,  if  the  order  n  is  <5,  then 
the  period  i1  •  •  •  in  may  be  repeated  0  times.  This  replaces  n  by  0n, 
and  we  need  only  choose  0  so  that  On  fulfills  (3'),  i.e.,  On  ^  5. 

Let  us  now  return  to  Figure  18e:  The  output  b  must  be  on  the  C, 
as  shown  there.  The  input  of  the  cycle,  i.e.,  the  point  fed  by  b', 
should  be  as  close  as  possible  to  this  C,  to  minimize  the  delay.  It 
cannot  be  on  the  C  itself,  because  C's  remaining  free  side  (which- 
ever of  6i  ,  62  is  not  used  for  b)  will  be  needed  for  another  purpose. 
We  place  it  therefore  immediately  before  C,  at  bi  or  62'.  (The  sense 
of  the  cycle  has  been  arranged  to  maximize  this  accessibility.) 

Now  the  pulser  P^'1  •  •  •  in)  of  Figure  16g  and  the  cycle  of  Figure 
18e  can  be  placed  into  actual  contact.  This  is  shown  in  Figure  18f, 
where 

n  =  21  +  r; 

I  =  2,3,       ;r  -  1,2. 


=  TOforr  =  1. 
=  C  for  r  =  2. 


Figure  18f  is  drawn  as  if  I  <  u  +  2,  but  I  ^  u  +  2  is  equally  possible. 
Note  that  the  cycle  is  rotated  against  its  previous  form  (Fig.  18e  vs. 
Fig.  18f),  to  have  a  convenient  fit  with  P^'1  •  •  •  in).  In  addition  the 
two  organs  are  separated  by  a  column  of  IPs,  to  avoid  the  possibility 
of  unwanted  stimulations  due  to  contacts  between  a  C  of  one  organ 
and  a  transmission  state  of  the  other. 

The  network  of  Figure  18f  takes  care  of  starting  j1  ■  —  jn  ;  there 
remains  the  task  of  providing  a  network  for  stopping  il  •  •  •  in. 


DESIGN   OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 


Since  we  have  not  introduced  any  states  (or  stimuli)  for  expressing 
the  negation  or  inhibition  directly,  this  must  now  be  done  by  indirect 
means.  The  obvious  way  to  achieve  this  is  by  using  special  stimuli, 
i.e.,  by  changing  the  character  of  one  of  the  transmission  and  con- 
fluent states  that  make  up  the  cycle  of  Figure  18e  (which  is,  after  a 
rotation,  part  of  Fig.  18f).  This  means  that  a_  should  control  a 
stimulus  [1]  which  is  directed  against  one  of  the  exposed  sides  of  the 
cycle.1  Figure  18g  shows  the  organ  that  will  do  this.  Since  it  will  be 
convenient  to  stimulate  this  organ  (from  a_  via  a")  from  above 
and  to  attach  it  to  the  upper  side  of  the  cycle,  Figure  18g  shows  it 
in  this  position.  The  output  b"  of  this  organ  may  be  attached  to  any 
cell  of  the  cycle.  In  the  position  shown  (cf.  Figs.  18f  and  18g)  this 
can  be  the  \  or  the  C;  in  the  two  other  possible  positions  (on  Fig. 
18f,  i.e.,  from  the  right  or  from  below)  it  could  be  the  C,  any  lo? 
the  Z.  (from  the  right),  the  L  or  the  X  (from  below). 

With  this  arrangement,  a  stimulus  [0]  from  a_  ,  arriving  at  a  ,  would 
excite  C  and  then  i1,  and  deliver  a  stimulus  [1]  at  b"  with  a  delay  3 
(counted  from  a  ).  Hence,  with  a  delay  4,  that  cell  of  the  cycle  which 
is  in  contact  with  b"  will  go  into  the  state  U  and  cease  to  emit. 
To  this  extent  the  stop  has  been  effected.  However,  there  remains 
the  question  of  the  further  fate  of  this  cell.  Indeed,  this  cell  is  now  a 
U;  hence  the  next  stimulus  [0]  traveling  through  the  cycle  will  con- 
vert it  into  an  Se  (unless  a  stimulus  [1]  does  this,  by  reaching  the 
cell  earlier  via  b").  After  this,  stimuli  ([0]  via  the  cycle  of  [1]  via 
6"),  as  well  as  their  absence,  will  transform  it  further,  through  the 
sensitized  states  {the  S2  with  2  from  list  (S.l)  of  Sec.  2.8.1},  to  an 
(ordinary  or  special)  transmission  state  or  to  the  confluent  state 
{T,  T'  or  C,  i.e.,  an  S2  with  2  from  list  (S.2)  of  Sec.  2.8.1}.  Which 
of  these  terminal  states  will  actually  be  reached  depends  on  the 
stimuli  circulating  in  the  cycle  (plus  stimuli  possibly  delivered  via 
b  ),  i.e.,  on  the  sequence  il  •  •  •  in,  as  well  as  on  the  phase  of  this 
occurrence. 

In  order  to  have  a  scheme  that  will  work  for  all  i1  •  •  •  in  and — 
what  is  more  important — for  all  phases  in  which  the  stop  may  be 
ordered,  it  is  best  to  see  to  it  that  U  gets  an  adequate  and  uninter- 
rupted sequence  of  stimuli  in  any  case.  Hence  it  is  best  to  deliver 
these  from  b" .  Consequently  they  will  be  stimuli  [1].  The  first  one 
will  convert  U  into  S# ,  and  three  more  will  transform  this  into 
Sin  =  Coo .  These  stimuli  [1]  follow  the  original  stimulus  [1],  which 
produced  the  U,  immediately.  Hence  a  total  of  five  consecutive 

1  [As  explained  in  Sec.  2.8.1  above,  "[0]"  represents  an  ordinary  stimulus, 
and  "[1]"  represents  a  special  stimulus.] 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


stimuli  [1]  at  6"  is  called  for,  i.e.,  five  consecutive  stimuli  [0]  at  a" . 
However,  before  we  discuss  these  any  further,  let  us  consider  the 
sequence  of  transformations  that  have  been  induced : 

,     Cycle  cell  (one  of  the  C,  X,  1,  lo,  I)  -> 

(4) 

— >  U  — >  Se  — >  Si  — >  Sn  — >  Sin  —  Coo . 

In  the  end  it  will  be  necessary  to  restore  the  cycle  cell  that  has 
been  so  transformed  to  its  original  condition.  It  is  simplest  to  use  the 
sequence  (4')  itself  for  this  purpose.  This  sequence  ends  with  a  C; 
hence  it  should  have  begun  with  a  C,  too.  That  is,  the  cycle  cell  in 
question  should  be  the  C  in  the  cycle.  This  means  that  the  b"  of 
Figure  18g  must  be  the  &i  of  Figure  18f.  Consequently  the  (ultimate) 
output  b  must  be  62 . 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  five  stimuli  [0]  at  a" .  These  could  be 
furnished  by  a  pulser  P (11111),  whose  output  b*  will  then  feed  a", 
while  its  input  a*  is  fed  by  a_  .  However,  one  more  point  needs  to 
be  considered. 

The  above  5  stimuli  paralyze  the  output  of  the  cycle  cell  of  (4')  at 
the  time  when  it  goes  into  the  state  U,  also  at  the  4  successive  times 
when  it  goes  into  the  states  ,  Si ,  Sn  ,  Sm  =  Coo ;  and  finally, 
since  C  responds  with  a  delay  2,  there  will  also  be  no  output  from 
this  cell  at  the  next  time.  That  is,  this  cell  is  silent  for  6  consecutive 
times.  If  the  length  n  of  the  period  is  ^6,  then  this  is  sufficient  to 
silence  the  cycle  for  good.  However,  if  n  >  6,  then  this  sequence  of  5 
stimuli  [1]  at  b" ,  i.e.,  of  5  stimuli  [0]  at  a  ' ,  must  be  repeated.  Let 
us  repeat  it  p  times.  It  is  clear  from  the  above,  that  we  could  insert 
a  0  (no  stimulus)  between  every  two  groups  of  11111  (5  stimuli), 
but  it  is  simpler  to  omit  this  insertion.  So  we  have  a  sequence  1  •  •  •  1 
of  order  5p.  This  will  take  the  cycle  cell  p  times  through  the  sequence 
(4  ),  and  thereby  silence  the  cycle  (i.e.,  its  output  b  =  62)  for  5p  +  1 
consecutive  times.  Hence  it  will  silence  it  for  good  if  n  ^  5p  +  1, 
i.e.,  if 

(5  )  p  ^  — - — . 


The  simplest  choice  of  p  is,  of  course,  as  the  smallest  integer  that 
satisfies  condition  (5'). 

Thus  the  pulser  referred  to  above  (with  its  output  b*  feeding  a' 
and  its  input  a*  fed  from  a_)  must  be  P(l  •  •  •  1)  of  order  5p.  The 
entire  arrangement  is  shown  in  Figure  18h.  Starring  all  quantities 
that  refer  to  this  pulser,  we  see  that  n*  =  k*  =  5p  and  vh*  =  h(h  = 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 


1,  •  •  •  ,  5p)  obtain;  hence  u*°  =  0  by  rule  (2')  of  Section  3.2.1,  so 
that  we  can  choose  u*  =  0. 

The  border  of  LPs  around  the  right  and  lower  sides  of  the  pulser 
in  Figure  18h  serves  again  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  unwanted  stimu- 
lations due  to  border  C's. 

Before  continuing,  we  will  point  out  an  important  special  case, 
where  the  introduction  of  the  pulser  of  Figure  18h  can  be  avoided. 
This  is  the  case  of  the  simplest  possible  period,  namely  1.  This  has 
the  order  n  =  1.  In  this  case1  we  proceed  as  follows. 

The  order  n  =  1  violates  the  condition  (3  );  hence  we  must  0-fold 
it,  so  that  On  fulfills  (3'),  i.e.,  with  an  0  ^  5.  (This  would  suggest 
0  =  5,  but  we  postpone  the  choice.)  The  new  n  is  0  (the  previous 
0n);  the  cycle  in  Figure  18f  has  the  period  n  =  0.  Now  assume  that  a 
stimulus  [1]  at  bi  of  Figure  18f  (i.e.,  at  b  of  Fig.  18g;  cf.  above), 
converts  the  right  upper  C  in  this  cycle  (Fig.  18f)  into  a  U.  This 
starts  the  sequence  (4  ).  To  complete  this  sequence  4  more  stimuli 
are  needed.  They  are  rigidly  timed.  In  our  discussion  after  sequence 
(4')  we  made  them  [l]'s  from  b" but  [0]\s  from  the  cycle  would  do 
just  as  well.  After  the  cycle  cell  has  undergone  its  first  transformation 
in  (4')  {i.e.,  (C  — *  U)},  the  cycle  will  still  deliver  n  —  2  stimuli 
[0]  to  it.  If  ft  —  2  =  4,  i.e.,  n  =  6,  then  this  is  precisely  what  is  needed 
to  complete  the  sequence  (4').  At  the  same  time  the  cycle  will  have 
been  silenced  for  good,  as  desired  (cf.  the  discussion  leading  to  condi- 
tion (5'),  or  condition  (5')  itself  with  n  =  6,  p  =  1).  Hence  we 
choose  ft  =  0  =  6.  (Note  that  this  fulfills  our  earlier  condition  0  ^ 
5,  but  it  is  not  the  minimum  choice  0  =  5  referred  to  there!) 

With  this  choice,  then,  a  single  stimulus  [1]  at  b"  (Fig.  18g)  suf- 
fices. In  this  case,  therefore,  the  addition  of  Figure  18h  to  Figure  18g 
is  not  needed.  However,  it  is  more  convenient  in  this  case  to  have  the 
input  a  on  the  left,  rather  than  on  the  upper  side  of  the  C.  Also, 
since  the  pulser  P(l  •  •  •  1)  of  Figure  18h  is  now  omitted,  it  is  con- 
venient, for  the  unification  of  the  notations,  to  identify  a  and  a*. 
This  is  shown  in  Figure  18i. 

We  can  now  perform  the  main  synthesis  by  joining  the  network  of 
Figure  18f  with  the  network  of  Figure  18h  {the  general  case: 
PP^1  •  •  .  in))  or  the  network  of  Figure  18i  {the  special  case:  PP  (1 )} . 
As  noted  before,  the  contact  must  be  made  at  b"  =  bi  ,  and  the 
(ultimate)  output  is  b  =  62  .  The  result  is  shown  in  Figures  18 j  and 
18k,  respectively.  Note  that  in  the  second  case  n  =  6,  also  h  =  6, 
vh  =  h(h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  6);  hence  by  formula  (2')  we  have  u  =  0,  so 
that  we  can  choose  u  =  0.  Consequently,  2k  =  12  and  u  +  2  =  2, 


1()8  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

us  shown  in  Figure  18k.  Note  also  that  though  Figure  18j  is  drawn 
as  if  I  <  u  +  2  and  lOp  <  2k  +  1,  either  or  both  of  I  ^  u  +  2  and 
lOp  ^  2k  +  1  are  equally  possible. 

Figures  18j  and  18k  contain  certain  delays,  from  the  stimulation  at 
a+  ,  or  rather  at  a,  to  the  start  at  b,  and  from  the  stimulation  at  a_  , 
or  rather  at  a*,  to  the  stop  at  b.  We  will  determine  these. 

Consider  the  first  case,  i.e.,  Figure  18 j . 

The  path  from  a  to  b2  =  b  in  Figure  18j  lies  entirely  in  the  lower 
half  of  the  network,  i.e.,  in  the  part  shown  in  Figure  18f.  Using  Figure 
18f,  we  saw  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.1  that  the  stimuli  of  i1  •  •  •  %n 
appear  at  b  with  an  absolute  delay  of  2k  +  u  +  1  after  the  stimulus 
at  a  .  To  this  absolute  delay  must  be  added  the  relative  delays  1,  •  •  •  , 
n,  so  that  the  sequence  i1  •  •  •  in  appears  at  bf  with  the  delays  2k  + 
u  +  2,  •  •  •  ,  2k  +  u  +  n  +  1.  The  delay  from  b'  to  b  is  clearly  4; 
hence  the  first  period  of  il  •  •  •  in  appears  at  b  with  the  delays  2k  + 
u  +  6,  •  •  •  ,  2k  +  u  +  n  +  5.  Thus  the  start  at  b  (6  =  62;  cf.  Fig. 
18 j )  is  delayed  against  the  stimulus  at  a  by  2k  +  u  +  6. 

The  path  from  a*  to  b2  =  b  in  Figure  18j  consists  of  the  part  from 
a*  to  bi  =  \1\  followed  by  the  part  from  bi  =  b"  to  b2  =  b.  The  part 
from  a*  to  b"  lies  entirely  in  the  upper  half  of  the  network,  i.e.,  in 
the  part  shown  in  Figure  18h.  Using  Figure  18h,  we  saw  at  the  end 
of  Section  3.2.1  that  the  stimuli  1  •  •  •  1  (order  5p)  appear  at  b* 
with  an  absolute  delay  of  2k*  +  u*  +  1  after  the  stimulus  at  a.  Since 
fc*  =  5p,  u*  =  0,  this  delay  is  lOp  +  1.  To  this  absolute  delay  must 
be  added  the  relative  delays  1,  •  •  •  ,  dp,  so  that  the  sequence  1  •  •  •  1 
appears  at  b*  with  the  delays  lOp  +  2,  •  •  •  ,  15p  +  1.  The  delay 
from  b*  to  b"  is  clearly  5;  hence  the  sequence  1  •••  1  appears  at 
bi  —  b"  with  the  delays  lOp  +  7,  •  •  •  ,  I5p  +  6.  Now  a  stimulus  [1] 
at  bi  (Fig.  18f)  inhibits  the  next  output  from  the  affected  C  {cf.  the 
discussion  of  sequence  (4')} .  Hence  the  output  at  62  is  stopped  with  a 
total  delay  of  lOp  +  8.  Thus  the  stop  at  b  (b  =  b2 ,  cf.  Fig.  18j)  is 
delayed  against  the  stimulus  at  a*  by  lOp  +  8. 

Consider  now  the  second  case,  i.e.,  Figure  18k. 

The  lower  halves  of  Figures  18 j  and  18k  have  the  same  structure; 
hence  the  delay  from  a  to  the  start  at  b  is  given  by  the  formula  de- 
rived above  for  the  first  case.  This  is  2k  +  u  +  6.  Since  now  k  = 
6,  u  =  0  (cf.  the  discussion  of  Fig.  18k),  this  delay  is  18. 

The  delay  from  a*  =  a  to  the  stop  at  b2  =  b  in  Figure  18k  is  also 
easy  to  determine.  The  path  from  a  to  bi  =  b"  is  also  shown  in 
Figure  18i.  Its  delay  is  clearly  3.  The  delay  from  a  stimulus  [1]  at 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 


1G9 


bi  to  a  stop  at  62  (Fig.  18f )  is  the  same  as  in  the  first  case,  that  is,  1. 
Thus  the  stop  at  b  (b  =  62 ;  cf.  Fig.  18k)  is  delayed  against  the  stimu- 
lus at  a*  (=  a";  cf.  Fig.  18k)  by  4. 

We  restate:  The  delay  from  a  stimulus  at  a  to  the  start  at  b  is 
2k  +  u  +  6  in  the  first  (general)  case  (Fig.  18j)  and  18  in  the  second 
(special)  case  (Fig.  18k).  The  delay  from  a  stimulus  at  a*  to  the  stop 
at  b  is  lOp  +  8  in  the  first  (general)  case  (Fig.  18j )  and  4  in  the  second 
(special)  case  (Fig.  18k). 

In  contrast  with  the  situation  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.1,  corrup- 
tion by  interference  in  this  network  is  a  definite  possibility.  It  is  easily 
verified  that  this  is  controlled  by  the  following  rules. 

Throughout  (6'.b)-(6'.d)  stimulations  at  a',  a*  should  be 
viewed  in  a  modified  chronological  ordering,  which  differs 
from  the  ordinary  one  by  certain  systematic  (relative) 
shifts.  All  statements  in  (6'.b)-(6'.d)  about  simultaneity, 
precedence,  and  ordering  of  such  stimuli  must  accordingly 
be  understood  in  this  modified  chronology.  This  chronology 
is  defined  as  follows.  The  ordering  of  stimulations  at  a 
relatively  to  each  other  is  unchanged;  also  the  ordering  of 
stimulations  at  a*  relatively  to  each  other  is  unchanged. 
Stimulations  at  a  are  displaced  relatively  to  stimulations 
at  a*  in  accordance  with  the  difference  between  the  delays 
from  a  to  the  start  at  b,  and  from  a*  to  the  stop  at  b.  In 
other  words,  all  these  stimulations  are  ordered  chrono- 
logically, not  by  the  times  of  their  respective  occurrences 
(at  a  or  at  a*),  but  by  the  times  at  which  they  take  effect 
(at  b,  in  the  form  of  a  start  at  b  for  a  ,  and  of  a  stop  at  b 
for  a*). 

Multiple  stimulations  at  a',  between  which  no  stimu- 
lations at  a*  occur,  simply  superposes  their  effects. 
One  could  therefore  say,  as  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.1, 
that  no  corruption  by  interference  takes  place  in  this  case. 
However,  it  must  be  noted  that  this  means  that  the  periodic 
emission  of  the  organ  (at  b)  may  be  changed  in  this  process, 
since  each  new  stimulation  at  a  superposes  the  period 
with  its  own  phase  on  the  (possibly  already  composite) 
period  produced  by  the  previous  stimulations.  Finally,  this 
change  is  void  in  the  special  case,  where  the  period  consists 
of  stimuli  only  (it  is  l!),  so  that  additional  superpositions 
cannot  alter  it. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


A  stimulation  at  a*  which  follows  upon  stimulations  at  a 
{for  these  cf.  rule  (6'.b)}  stops  the  period  generated  by 
these.  Multiple  stimulations  at  a*  have  no  effect  beyond 
that  one  of  the  first  one  among  them;  i.e.,  the  stop  caused 

<  by  the  first  one  is  maintained  by  the  others,  but  it  would 
be  equally  maintained  without  them.2  It  should  be  noted 
that  if  stimulations  at  a  and  at  a*  are  simultaneous,  the 
latter  overrides  the  former;  i.e.,  no  emissions  at  b  will 
occur. 

A  stimulation  at  a  which  follows  upon  stimulations  at 
a  takes  full  effect  {in  the  sense  of  (6  .b)j  only  if  it  nas  a 
delay  ^  5p  +  1  (this  is  the  general  case;  in  the  special 

<  case  put  p  =  1 )  against  the  former.  If  it  comes  earlier, 
then  those  stimuli  in  the  period  whose  first  occurrences 
would  take  place  with  a  delay  <  5p  +  1  will  be  perpetually 
removed  from  the  period. 

To  conclude,  we  will  make  some  adjustments  to  equalize  the  delays 
from  a  to  the  start  at  b  and  from  a*  to  the  stop  at  b,  thereby  eliminating 
the  complications  caused  by  the  special  ordering  of  (6'. a)  in  (6'.b)- 
(6'.d).  This  will  be  done  by  inserting  suitable  delay  paths  between 
a+  and  a  on  one  hand,  and  between  a_  and  a*  on  the  other.  We  will 
distinguish  three  sub-cases,  as  follows. 

First,  assume  the  case  of  Figure  18j  and  lOp  <  2k  +  1.  Define  zx 
by  lOp  +  z\  =  2k  +  1,  so  that  Z\  =  1,  2,  •  •  •  .  Attach  the  network 
shown  in  Figure  19a  to  the  left  side  of  Figure  18j.  The  delay  from  a+ 
to  a'  is  3;  hence  the  delay  from  a+  to  the  start  at  b  is  3  +  (2k  + 
^  +  6)  =  2k  +  u  +  9.  The  delay  from  a_  to  a*  is  u  +  zx  ;  hence 
the  delay  from  a_  to  the  stop  at  6  is  (u  +  zx)  +  (lOp  +  8)  =  (lOp  + 
zi)  +  (u  +  8)  =  (2k  +  1)  +  (u  +  8)  =  2k  +  u  +  9. 

Thus  both  delays  are  2k  +  u  +  9,  and  Figures  18j  and  19a  put 
together  assume  the  aspect  of  Figure  19c.  This  figure  is  drawn  as  if 
I  <  u  +  2,  but  I  ^  u  +  2  is  equally  possible. 

Second,  assume  the  case  of  Figure  18j  and  lOp  ^  2k  +  1.  Define 
z2  by  (2k  +  1)  +  z2  =  lOp,  so  that  z2  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  .  Attach  the  net- 
work shown  in  Figure  19b  to  the  left  side  of  Figure  18j.  The  delay 
from  a+  to  a  is  3  +  z2  ;  hence  the  delay  from  a+  to  the  start  at  b  is 
(3  +  z2)  +  (2k  +  u  +  6)  =  ((2k  +  1)  +  z2)  +  (u  +  8)  =  lOp  + 
u  +  8.  The  delay  from  a_  to  a*  is  u\  hence  the  delay  from  a_  to  the 
stop  at  b  is  u  +  (lOp  +  8)  =  10p  +  u  +  8. 

Thus  both  delays  are  lOp  +  u  +  8,  and  Figures  18j  and  19b  put 

2  [There  is  an  error  here,  which  we  will  discuss  at  the  end  of  the  subsection.] 


(6'.c) 


(6'.d) 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




together  assume  the  aspect  of  Figure  19d.  This  figure  is  drawn  as  if 
(  <  u  +  2,  but  I  ^  u  +  2  is  equally  possible. 

Before  going  on  to  the  third  case,  note  that  the  common  delay  in 
the  first  case  (where  lOp  <  2k  +  1)  is  2k  +  u  +  9,  while  in  the 
second  case  (where  10p  ^  2k  +  1)  it  is  lOp  +  u  +  8.  Both  cases 
are  covered  by  the  expression  M  +  u  +  8,  where 

(?')  Af  =  Max  (10p,  2fc  +  1). 

Also,  Figures  19c  and  19d  have  in  every  way  the  same  outward 
appearance,  except  that  the  first  has  the  width  2k  +  4,  while  the 
second  has  the  width  lOp  +  3.  Again  both  cases  are  covered  by  one 
expression,  namely  by  M  +  3.  Hence  Figure  19e  represents  both 
Figures  19c  and  19d.  Figure  19e  is  drawn  as  if  I  <  u  +  2,  but  I  ^ 
u  +  2  is  equally  possible. 

Third,  assume  the  case  of  Figure  18k.  Attach  the  structure  shown 
in  Figure  19f  to  the  left  side  of  Figure  18k.  Also,  identify  a  with  a+  . 
The  delay  from  a+  to  the  start  at  b  is  then  the  same  as  that  one  from 
a,  that  is,  18.  The  delay  from  a_  to  a*  is  14;  hence  the  delay  from  a_ 
to  the  stop  at  b  is  14  +  4  =  18. 

Thus  both  delays  are  18,  and  Figures  18k  and  19f  put  together 
assume  the  aspect  of  Figure  19g. 

Figures  19d  and  19g  are  the  desired  network  in  the  case  of  a  general 
PP^1  •  •  •  in)  and  of  the  special  PP(T)  {represented  with  n  =  6,  i.e., 
as  PP (111111)},  respectively.  It  is  worthwhile  to  introduce  a  joint 
abbreviated  representation  for  these.  In  the  case  of  Figure  19d  we 
bring  it  to  the  uniform  height  of  N  +  3,  where 

(8')  N  =  Max  (u  +  2, 

by  filling  in  U's  as  needed.  Figure  19g  need  not  be  changed  at  all.  The 
result  is  shown  in  Figure  19h.  For  the  general  case  of  PP^'1  •  •  •  in): 

K  =  M  +  3,  L  =  N  +  3,  Li  =  2,  L2  =  4,  Lz  =  L  -  4. 

For  the  special  case  of  PP  (I) : 

K  =  15,  L  =  4,  U  =  0,  L2  =  3,  L3  =  1. 

The  delays  from  a+  to  the  start  at  b  and  from  a_  to  the  stop  at  b 
are  the  same.  This  common  delay  is  M  +  u  +  8  in  the  general  case 
and  18  in  the  special  case.  We  can  now  reformulate  the  rules  (6.a)- 
(6.d),  with  a+  in  place  of  a  and  a_  in  place  of  a*,  and  with  the  common 
delay  for  starting  and  stopping.  This  eliminates,  as  observed  earlier, 
the  need  for  the  special  ordering  of  rule  (6'.a).  We  obtain  accordingly 
this. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


The  rules  that  govern  possible  corruption  by  interference  are  now 
modified  from  their  form  in  (6'.a)-(6'.d)  in  this  way: 

The  special  chronology  for  stimulations  at  a  and  a*,  as  de- 
fined in  (6'. a),  is  now  replaced  by  the  ordinary  chronology 
of  the  occurrence  of  stimulations  at  a+  and  a_  .  That  is,  all 
(9')  \  comparisons  must  now  be  made  according  to  the  times  at 
which  stimulations  occur  at  a+  and  a_  .  With  this  modi- 
fication (and  replacing  a  by  a+  and  a*  by  a  J)  the  rules  of 
v  (6/.b)-(()/.d)  remain  valid. 

[As  noted  above,  there  is  an  error  in  von  Neumann's  rule  (6'.c) 
concerning  the  timing  of  a  periodic  pulser.  There  is  also  an  important 
case  which  von  Neumann  didn't  discuss,  namely,  the  case  in  which  a 
"stop"  stimulus  precedes  a  "start"  stimulus. 

Let  us  consider  first  the  timing  of  von  Neumann's  periodic  pulsers, 
using  Figure  17  as  an  example.  For  the  periodic  pulser  PP  (10010001) 
we  have  the  following  phasing.  A  "start"  stimulus  into  input  a+  at 
time  2  will  cause  the  sequence  10010001  to  enter  cell  H4  from  cell  G4 
at  times  2  +  31  through  2  +  38.  A  "stop"  stimulus  into  input  a_  at 
time  2  will  cause  the  sequence  1111111111  to  enter  cell  H4  from  cell 
H3  at  times  t  +  32  through  t  +  41.  In  this  case  nothing  is  emitted 
from  the  output  b,  since  the  killing  signal  from  H3  dominates  the 
transmission  signal  from  G4-  If  the  "stop"  stimulus  comes  one  moment 
later  (at  time  2  +  1),  the  sequence  1111111111  enters  cell  H4  from 
cell  H3  at  times  2  +  33  through  2  +  42.  In  this  case  cell  H4  is  in 
state  Coo  at  time  2  +  31,  in  state  Coi  at  time  2  +  32,  in  state  Cio  at 
time  2  +  33  (and  a  pulse  is  emitted  from  b  at  time  2  +  33),  and  in 
state  U  at  time  2  +  34. 

Consider  next  the  phasing  of  von  Neumann's  special  periodic 
pulser  PP(T).  A  "start"  stimulus  into  input  a+  at  time  2  produces 
the  sequence  111111  into  cell  E3  from  cell  D3  at  times  2  +  16  through 
t  +  21.  A  "stop"  stimulus  into  input  a_  at  time  t  enters  cell  E3  from 
cell  E2  at  time  2+17.  Consequently,  nothing  is  emitted  from  b  if 
the  "start"  and  "stop"  stimuli  are  simultaneous.  If  the  "stop" 
stimulus  comes  one  moment  later,  then  one  pulse  is  emitted  from  6, 
as  was  the  case  with  the  periodic  pulser  PP  (10010001). 

It  should  be  noted  that  we  have  measured  the  delay  from  the  input 
a+  and  a_  up  to  (but  not  including)  the  cell  containing  the  confluent 
state  C  which  drives  the  output  b.  Von  Neumann  measured  these 
delays  through  this  cell  to  the  output  b.  For  a  signal  from  the  "stop" 
input  a_  the  delay  through  this  final  cell  is  only  1  unit,  since  killing 
takes  only  1  unit  of  time.  Hence  the  delay  from  both  a+  and  a_  to 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




the  stop  at  b  is  33  for  PP  (10010001)  and  18  for  von  Neumann's 
PP(1).  See  Table  I. 

Thus  the  phasing  for  all  periodic  pulsers  PP(^  •  •  •  in)  constructed 
by  von  Neumann's  algorithm  is  as  follows.  Assume  the  periodic 
pulser  is  as  designed  and  is  quiescent.  If  the  "start"  stimulus  into 
input  a+  and  the  "stop"  stimulus  into  input  a_  are  simultaneous, 
nothing  is  emitted  from  output  b,  and  the  periodic  pulser  is  left  in 
its  initial  state.  If  the  "stop"  stimulus  follows  the  "start"  stimulus 
by  T(T  >  0)  units  of  time,  the  sequence  il  •  •  •  in  is  emitted  v  times 
and  then  an  initial  sequent  of  it  of  length  \x  is  emitted,  where  T  = 
n*>  +  ju,  ju  <  n,  and  either  v  or  /x  may  be  zero.  This  phasing  is  as  von 
Neumann  intended  and  is  in  accord  with  his  rules.  But  von  Neumann 
did  not  consider  all  the  cases  in  which  the  "stop"  stimulus  precedes 
the  start  stimulus  (i.e.,  T  <  0).  Apparently,  he  planned  to  use  each 
periodic  pulser  in  such  a  way  that  there  would  be  a  one  to  one  corre- 
spondence of  "start"  to  "stop"  stimuli,  with  the  m'th  "stop"  stimulus 
coming  no  earlier  than  the  m'th  "start"  stimulus,  with  the  m'th 
"stop"  stimulus  preceding  the  (m  +  l)st  "start"  stimulus  by  a 
sufficient  length  of  time  for  the  periodic  repeater  to  be  cleared  pro- 
perly. But  he  did  not  state  this  intention,  and  in  his  subsequent  use 
of  periodic  pulsers  he  did  not  always  conform  to  it. 

Consider  the  effect  of  feeding  the  sequence  101  into  the  "stop" 
input  a_  of  PP  (10010001).  This  sequence  will  cause  the  upper  pulser 
P  (1111111111)  to  emit  12  (rather  than  10)  pulses  and  (depending 
on  the  phasing  of  the  "start"  input  a+)  may  leave  cell  H4  in  an 
undesired  state.  For  some  conditions  of  the  phasing  of  101  into  a_ 


Table  I 

External  characteristics  of  periodic  pulsers 


General  Case 

Special  Case 

In  terms  of 
parameters 

Example  of 
PP(10010001) 

Von  Neu- 
mann's 

PP(1) 

Alternate 
PP(T) 

Width  K  

M  +  3 




Height  L  

N  +  3 




Number  of  cells  below  an  input  or 

output 

Input  a+  





Input  a   





Output  b  

L  -  4 




Delay  from  input  a+  to  b.  Also,  de- 

lay from  input  a.,  to  stop  at  6.. 

M  +  u  +  8 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


and  1  into  a+  ,  the  cell  H5  may  be  killed  to  U.  This  difficulty  may 
be  solved  by  the  following  rule  of  usage.  The  "stop"  input  a_  of  a 
"general  case"  periodic  pulser  PP^1  •  •  •  in)  is  never  to  be  stimulated 
twice  in  any  time  span  of  length  n.  Actually,  all  of  von  Neumann's 
later  uses  of  "general  case"  periodic  pulsers  conform  to  this  rule. 

There  is  a  more  serious  problem  in  von  Neumann's  "special  case" 
periodic  pulser  PP(T).  A  stimulus  into  the  "stop"  input  a_  changes 
cell  E3  into  U,  and  then  the  four  pulses  in  the  pulser  P  (111111 )  or  the 
periodic  repeater  (or  both)  operate  by  the  direct  process  to  leave  E3 
in  the  confluent  state  C.  But  suppose  a  "stop"  stimulus  precedes  a 
"start"  stimulus.  Then  cell  E3  will  not  be  left  in  the  correct  state! 
This  fact  causes  no  trouble  when  von  Neumann's  PP(1)  is  used  in 
the  triple-return  counter  (Sec.  3.4  below),  but  it  does  cause  incorrect 
operation  of  his  control  organ  CO  as  it  is  used  in  the  read-write-erase- 
control  RWEC  (Sec.  4.3.4  below).  We  could  modify  some  of  the 
contextual  circuitry  of  the  CO,  but  it  is  better  to  use  a  PP(1)  in  the 
CO  which  is  not  contaminated  if  it  is  turned  off  before  being  turned 
on. 

This  alternate  PP(I)  is  shown  in  Figure  20.  It  uses  two  modified 
pulsers  P(lllll),  one  above  and  one  below.  A  "start"  stimulus  into 
input  a+  at  time  t  causes  the  sequence  11111  to  enter  cell  G3  from 
cell  G4  at  times  t  +  17  through  t  +  21.  If  cell  G3  is  in  the  confluent 
state  C  this  sequence  will  emerge  from  the  output  b  at  times  t  +  19 
through  t  +  23,  so  the  delay  from  input  a+  to  b  is  19  units  of  time.  A 
"stop"  stimulus  into  input  a_  at  time  t  causes  the  sequence  11111 
to  enter  cell  G3  from  cell  G2  at  times  t  +  18  through  t  +  22.  Since 
killing  takes  only  1  unit  of  time,  the  delay  from  input  a  to  the  stop 
at  b  is  19  units,  which  is  the  way  von  Neumann  counted  it.  See  Table  I. 

Note  further  that  if  the  start  input  a+  is  stimulated  from  1  to  4 
units  of  time  after  the  stop  input  a_  is  stimulated,  from  1  to  4  pulses 
will  be  left  in  the  repeater  .Hence  we  stipulate  the  following  rule  of 
usage  for  the  alternate  PP  (1)  of  Figure  20:  the  stop  input  a_  is  never 
to  be  stimulated  twice  within  5  units  of  time,  and  the  start  input 
a+  is  never  to  be  stimulated  from  1  to  4  units  of  time  after  the  stop 
input  is  stimulated.  The  structure  of  the  read-write-erase-control 
unit  RWEC  is  such  that  this  rule  is  always  satisfied.  When  operated 
in  an  environment  which  conforms  to  this  rule,  the  alternate  PP(T) 
functions  as  a  "flip-flop."  It  is  turned  on  at  a+  ,  off  at  a_ ,  and  while 
it  is  on  it  emits  a  continuous  sequence  of  stimuli  from  b  which  may 
be  used  to  operate  a  gate  (confluent  state). 

We  will  now  summarize  the  external  characteristics  of  periodic 
pulsers.  Von  Neumann's  special  case  PP(1)  is  shown  in  Figure  17b. 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




Our  alternate  special  case  PP(T)  is  shown  in  Figure  20.  The  external 
characteristics  of  both  of  these  PP  (1 )  are  given  in  Table  I. 

The  general  case  PP  (il  • « •  in),  with  n  ^  5,  is  shown  in  Figure  19h. 
If  n  <  5  and  the  special  case  does  not  apply,  the  characteristic  is 
iterated  until  n  ^  5;  for  example,  if  PP  (101)  is  asked  for,  PP  (101101) 
is  constructed.  The  general  case  PP^1  •••  in)  contains  the  pulser 
P  (il  -  •  •  in),  for  which  u  and  k  are  defined  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.1. 
The  following  string  of  definitions  leads  to  the  parameters  K  (width) 
and  L  (height)  of  PP(i*  ...  *»). 

I  =  integer  part  of  (n  —  l)/2 

N  =  Maximum  of  u  +  2  and  I 

L  =  N  +  3 

p  =  The  smallest  integer  such  that  5p  ^  n  —  1 

M  =  Maximum  of  lOp  and  2k  +  1 

K  =  M  +  3. 

Further  information  is  given  in  Table  I.] 

3.3  The  Decoding  Organ:  Structure,  Dimensions,  and  Timing 

[Figure  21  shows  the  decoding  organ  D (10010001).  This  decoding 
organ  has  characteristic  10010001  and  order  8.  All  sequences  of  length 
8  can  be  divided  into  two  classes :  those  which  are  bitwise  implied  by 
(contain  all  the  stimuli  of)  the  characteristic  10010001  (e.g.,  10010001 
and  11010011),  and  those  which  are  not  (e.g.,  10000001  and 
10010010).  If  a  sequence  of  the  former  class  is  fed  into  input  a,  a 
single  stimulus  will  come  from  output  b  after  a  suitable  delay,  while  a 
sequence  of  the  latter  class  produces  no  output. 

A  decoding  organ  is  to  be  distinguished  from  a  "recognizing"  device 
which  produces  an  output  for  some  particular  sequence  (e.g., 
10010001)  and  no  other.  Such  devices  are  discussed  in  Section  3.5. 

The  decoder  D  (10010001)  works  in  this  manner.  Suppose  the  se- 
quence iHHHHHHH8,  with  i1  =  1,  =  1,  and  i  =  1,  enters  input  a  at 
times  t  through  t  +  7;  the  three  stimuli  i1,  i,  and  i  enter  with  relative 
delays  0,  3,  and  7,  respectively.  Paths  B  and  D  meet  at  the  confluent 
state  Dl  with  delays  of  21  and  18,  respectively;  hence  il  and  i  will 
produce  an  output  from  cell  Dl  at  time  23.  This  output  will  arrive  at 
cell  Fl  at  time  24,  coincident  with  the  arrival  of  i  via  path  F,  thereby 
producing  an  output  from  b  at  time  26.  Note  that  since  there  are 
three  ones  in  the  characteristic  10010001,  three  paths  (B,  D,  and  F) 
are  needed  in  the  decoder. 

The  design  of  a  decoding  organ  is  very  similar  to  that  of  a  pulser 
(Sec.  3.2.1).  Indeed,  a  pulser  is  in  fact  a  coder.  For  the  decoding 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


organ,  however,  confluent  states  are  needed  along  the  top  row  to 
detect  coincidence.  When  confluent  states  are  needed  to  introduce 
relative  delays  between  paths  of  odd  amounts  (e.g.,  as  in  cell  B3 
of  Fig.  21),  then  these  confluent  states  must  be  isolated  from  those  in 
the  top  row  by  means  of  T0i€  states  (as  in  row  2  of  Fig.  21).] 

Our  third  construction  is  the  decoding  organ.  This  organ  has  an 
input  a  and  an  output  b.  The  ideal  form  would  be  one  which,  upon 
the  arrival  of  a  prescribed  sequence,  say  i1  •  •  •  in,  at  a,  and  only  then, 
will  emit  a  single  stimulus  at  b.  However,  for  our  specific  applications 
of  this  organ  a  simpler  requirement  will  do,  and  this  is  the  one  that 
we  are  going  to  use.  It  is  as  follows.  Let  a  sequence,  e.g.,  il  •  •  •  in, 
be  prescribed.  Upon  arrival  of  any  sequence  jl  •  •  •  jn  at  a,  which 
contains  all  the  stimuli  of  i1  •  •  •  in  (i.e.,  such  that  i  =  1  implies 
f  =  1),  and  only  then,  it  will  emit  a  single  stimulus  at  b. 

The  relation  between  the  actuating  sequence  jl  •  •  •  jn  at  a  and  the 
response  at  6  is  freely  timed;  i.e.,  the  delay  between  these  is  not  pre- 
scribed at  this  point  (cf.,  however,  the  remarks  at  the  end  of  this 
section). 

This  decoding  organ  has  the  symbol  D^'1  •  •  •  in).  The  sequence 
ti  ...  {ny  which  can  be  prescribed  at  will,  is  its  characteristic,  and  n  is 
its  order. 

The  required  network  is  successively  developed  in  Figure  22.  This 
construction  and  the  network  that  results  from  it  are  discussed  in  the 
balance  of  this  section.  They  have  a  great  deal  in  common  with  those 
for  the  pulser  P(ix  •  •  •  in),  as  discussed  in  Section  3.2.1. 

Let  vi ,  •  •  •  ,  Vk  be  the  v  for  which  i  =  1,  i.e.,  the  positions  of  the 
stimuli  in  the  sequence  il  •  •  •  in.  (At  this  occasion,  unlike  in  Sec. 
3.2.1,  we  are  not  interested  in  their  monotone  ordering.)  Write 

/10/x  f  n  —  vh  =  2nh  +  rh\ 

UU  ;  \  where  ^  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  ;  n  =  0,  1. 

{Note  the  difference  between  equation  (10')  and  equation  (l')!} 

The  input  stimuli  at  a  must  be  compared,  to  see  whether  k  stimuli 
with  the  relative  delays  v i ,  •  •  •  ,  vk  are  present  there.  This  can  be 
done  by  multiplexing  each  stimulus  that  arrives  at  a  to  k  distinct 
stimuli,  numbers  h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k,  arriving  at  some  comparison  point 
b'  with  the  relative  delays  n  —  vh  (h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  fc),  respectively.  Then 
the  simultaneous  arrival  of  k  stimuli  at  b'  is  equivalent  to  the  arrival 
of  k  distinct  stimuli,  numbers  h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k,  arriving  at  a  with  the 
relative  delays  vi ,  •  •  •  ,  vu  . 

Hence  we  need  k  paths,  numbers  h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k,  from  a  to  b  ,  which 
have  the  relative  delays  n  —  vh  (h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  fc),  respectively,  with 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




respect  to  each  other.  However,  we  cannot  sense  a  /c-fold  coincidence 
by  a  single  act,  at  a  single  point,  if  k  >  3.  (k  =  3  is  the  maximum  that 
a  single  C  can  handle;  cf.  Sec.  2.3.2.)  It  is  therefore  best  to  bring 
these  k  paths  together  pairwise.  First,  paths  1  and  2  merge  at  a 
comparison  point  b2  (it  is  better  to  begin  with  b2  rather  than  with 
£>/;  cf.  below),  so  that  joint  path  2  continues  from  b2 then  paths  2' 
and  3  merge  at  a  comparison  point  63 ,  so  that  joint  path  3'  continues 
from  bz\  then  paths  3'  and  4  merge  at  a  comparison  point  &/,  so 
that  joint  path  4'  continues  from  &/;  •  •  •  ;  and  finally  paths  (k  — 
1)'  and  k  merge  at  bk',  so  that  joint  path  k!  continues  from  bk'  directly 
to  the  output  b.  In  this  successive  way  2-fold  coincidences  at  b2\  •  •  •  , 
bk  replace  the  single  fc-fold  coincidence  at  b'.  A  C  can,  of  course, 
handle  a  2-fold  coincidence  without  difficulty  (cf.  Sec.  2.3.2). 

This  procedure  clearly  calls  for  a  network  of  the  type  developed  in 
Figures  16a  and  16b.  Consider  first  Figure  16a.  Here  the  stimulus 
entering  at  a  reaches  b  over  k  different  paths,  and  while  the  delays 
that  are  desired  for  each  one  of  these  paths  are  not  yet  properly 
adjusted,  this  can  be  attended  to  afterwards,  with  the  means  of 
Figure  16b,  i.e.,  with  the  networks  N  of  Figure  16c,  as  detailed  in 
Figures  16d-16f.  We  discuss  first  another  imperfection  that  Figure 
16a  presents  in  the  present  situation.  This  is  the  following. 

In  Figure  16a  the  k  paths  that  are  produced  by  the  C  on  the  base 
line  are  directly  merged  by  those  o  on  the  top  line  that  lie  above  the 
C  (on  the  base  line)  numbered  2,  3,  •  •  •  ,  k.  These  mergers  are  effected 
by  o  cells,  i.e.,  without  any  coincidence  requirements.  This  is  confor- 
mal  to  the  purposes  of  Figure  16a  in  Section  3.2.1  but  not  to  our 
present  ones.  The  k  —  1  cells  o>  in  question,  where  these  mergers 
occur,  are  obviously  the  comparison  points  b2,  bz,  •  •  •  ,  referred 
to  above.  Hence  these  must  be  able  to  sense  coincidences;  i.e.,  they 
should  be  C,  not  jdi.  For  reasons  of  symmetry  we  also  replace  the 
o  on  the  top  line  above  the  C  (on  the  base  line)  numbered  1,  by  C, 
and  call  it  &/.  This  new  arrangement  is  shown  in  Figure  22a. 

A  stimulus  arriving  at  a  has  k  paths  available  to  reach  6.  On  path 
h  (h  =  1,  -  "  ,  k)  it  goes  horizontally  from  a  to  the  (base  line)  C 
numbered  h;  then  it  turns  vertically  up,  ascends  to  the  top  line  (to 
the  C  at  bh)  and  continues  there  horizontally  to  6.  (Up  to  this  point, 
and  not  further,  we  are  following  the  pattern  of  Fig.  16a.)  These  are 
(2h  -  1)  +  u  +  (2(fc  -  h)  +  1)  =  2k  +  u  steps,  but  since  h  + 
(fc  —  h  +  1)  =  k  +  1  of  them  are  C's,  the  entire  delay  involved  is 
8k  +  u  +  1.  That  is,  the  delay  is  the  same  on  all  paths. 

In  view  of  this  we  must  increase  the  delay  on  path  number  h  by 
n  —  vh  =  2/x/  +  rh'.  {Cf.  equation  (10').}  This  can  be  achieved 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


exactly  as  was  its  analog  in  Section  3.2.1:  each  vertical  branch  is 
replaced  by  a  suitable  delay  network,  say  branch  number  h  by  a 
network  Nh.  This  Nh  is  like  the  Nh  of  Figure  16e;  that  is,  it  is  made 
up  of  the  parts  shown  in  Figures  16d-16f,  except  that  now  ,  Th  are 
replaced  by  /x/>  n  .  Thus  Figure  22b  results,  which  is  related  to  Figure 
22a  in  the  same  way  that  Figure  16b  is  related  to  Figure  16a.  The 
height  u  obtains  by  repetition  of  the  considerations  of  Section  3.2.1 
that  led  up  to  condition  (2  ).  {Now  nh  ,  rh  are  replaced  by  /x/,  r/, 
i.e.,  the  vh  —  h  of  (l')  are  replaced  by  the  n  —  vhoi  equation  (10').} 
We  obtain  the  condition  u  ^  u°  (in  analogy  to  condition  (2'),  with 
the  modifications  mentioned  above),  where 


(11') 


u°  =  Max  {n  —  Vh)  +  e'°, 

where  e'°  =  1  if  the  Max  is  even  but  some  n  —  Vh  is  odd, 
and  e°  =  0  otherwise. 

/o 


It  is,  of  course,  simplest  to  put  u  =  u 

[Von  Neumann  overlooked  the  need  for  an  extra  row  of  cells 
between  row  u  of  Figure  22a  and  the  top  row  in  case  row  u  contains  a 
confluent  state.  Otherwise,  the  confluent  state  of  row  u  will  be  adja- 
cent to  a  confluent  state  in  the  top  row,  creating  an  open  path,  since  a 
confluent  state  cannot  directly  drive  another  confluent  state.  Row  2 
of  Figure  21  is  this  extra  row  which  von  Neumann  overlooked;  if 
row  2  were  deleted,  the  confluent  states  of  cells  Bl  and  B3  would  be 
adjacent. 

This  oversight  may  be  remedied  without  changing  von  Neumann's 
parameters  as  follows.  Let  1  ^  v±  <  vi  <  •  •  •  <  rk  <  n.  Then  there 
are  two  cases,  according  to  whether  an  extra  confluent  state  occurs 
in  the  leftmost  path  (i.e.,  the  path  for  vi)  or  another  path.  If  an  extra 
confluent  state  occurs  in  the  leftmost  path,  replace  it  and  the  con- 
fluent state  above  it  (i.e.,  in  the  top  row)  by  a  block  of  four  connected 
ordinary  transmission  states.  Thus  in  Figure  21,  put  a  block  of  four 
ordinary  transmission  states  in  cells  Al,  Bl,  A3  and  B3  and  delete 
row  2.  If  an  extra  confluent  state  occurs  in  a  path  other  than  the 
leftmost  path,  place  it  one  cell  lower.] 

This  completes  the  construction.  As  Figure  22b  shows,  the  area  of 
this  network  has  the  width  2k  and  the  height  u  +  2.  An  abbreviated 
representation  of  this  network  is  given  in  Figure  22c. 

The  delay  from  a  to  b  through  Figure  22a  was  3k  +  u  +  1  on  each 
path.  Through  Figure  22b  it  is  therefore  1  +  (3k  +  u  +  1)  +  (n  — 
Vh)  on  path  number  h.  The  first  term,  1,  is  due  to  the  insertion  of  the 
o  before  the  first  C  in  Figure  22a.  Hence  stimulus  number  vh  (with 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




in  =  1 )  in  the  sequence  i1  •  •  •  in  at  a  reaches  b  with  a  delay  (3k  + 
u  +  2)  +  n.  This  is  counted  from  the  time  immediately  before  the 
start  of  the  sequence  il  •  •  •  in;  hence  the  delay  counted  exactly  from 
its  start  is  3k  +  u  +  n  +  1.  This  is  the  same  for  all  h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k, 
as  it  should  be.  Hence  the  stimulus  indicating  this  A;-fold  coincidence 
(i.e.,  the  presence  of  a  sequence  jl  •  •  •  jn,  containing  i1  •  •  •  in,  at  a; 
cf.  above)  will  appear  at  b  with  a  delay  3k  +  u  +  n  +  1.  Thus, 
in  the  final  arrangement,  represented  by  Figure  22c,  there  is  from  the 
arrival  of  a  sequence/  •  •  •  jn  (containing  i1  •  •  •  in)  a  delay  3k  +  u  + 
n  +  1  to  the  response  at  b. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  in  this  network  no  corruption  by  interference 
occurs.  That  is,  whatever  stimuli  may  arrive  at  a,  whenever  there 
occurs  a  sequence  jl  •  •  •  jn  among  them  that  contains  il  •  •  •  in,  there 
will  be  a  response  stimulus  at  b,  with  a  delay  3k  +  u  +  n  from  the 
beginning  of  that  sequence. 

[  We  will  summarize  the  external  characteristics  of  the  decoding 
organ  D^'1  •  -  •  in).  See  Figure  22c. 

The  width  of  the  pulser  is  2k,  where  k  is  the  number  of  l's  in  the 
characteristic  il  •  •  •  in.  Von  Neumann  implicitly  assumed  that  k  ^ 
2;  for  k  =  0  and  k  =  1  no  organ  is  needed. 

The  height  of  the  decoding  organ  is  u  +  2,  where  u  is  defined  as 
follows.  The  vi ,  •  •  •  ,  vk  are  the  v  for  which  i  =  1.  Note  that  n  is  the 
length  of  the  characteristic  and  the  vx  is  the  superscript  of  the  first 
1 ;  hence  n  —  vi  is  the  number  of  bits  in  the  characteristic  which  are 
to  the  right  of  the  first  1.  Since  all  vk  (h  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  k)  are  positive, 
Max  (n  —  vh)  =  n  —  v\.  Von  Neumann's  rule  for  u  then  becomes 

u    =   (n  —  vi)  +  where 

e'°  =  1  if  (n  —  vi)  is  even  but  some  n  —  vh  (h     2,  •  •  •  ,  k)  is  odd, 

e'°  =  0  otherwise. 

The  delay  between  the  input  signal  il  entering  input  a  and  the  out- 
put pulse  leaving  b  is  3k  +  u  +  n  +  1.] 

3.4  The  Triple -return  Counter 

[  In  the  preceding  sections  von  Neumann  gave  algorithms  for  de- 
signing  an  arbitrary  pulser  P^1  •  •  •  in),  an  arbitrary  periodic  pulser 
PP^'1  •  •  •  in),  and  an  arbitrary  decoder  Q(#  •  •  •  in).  He  next 
designed  a  specific  organ,  the  triple-return  counter  The  completed 
organ  is  shown  in  Figure  23,  though  not  to  scale.  The  periodic  pulsers 
PP(T)  are  those  of  Figure  17,  with  width  15  and  height  4;  hence  the 
actual  width  of  $  is  24  and  its  actual  height  is  26.  The  long  lines  with 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


arrows  in  Figure  23  symbolize  sequences  of  ordinary  transmission 
states  being  used  for  transmission  only,  not  for  disjunction. 

Von  Neumann  needed  the  triple-return  counter  for  a  specific  pur- 
pose, that  of  sending  a  pulse  around  a  connecting  loop  (Ci  or  C2)  of 
the  external  tape  L  three  times;  see  Figure  37.  Suppose  that  the 
secondary  output  d  of  <£>  is  connected  to  the  input  t>2  of  connecting 
loop  C2  and  that  the  output  w2  of  loop  C2  is  connected  to  the  second- 
ary input  c  of  <£.  A  pulse  into  the  primary  input  a  of  $  will  go  around 
loop  C2  three  times  and  will  then  be  emitted  from  the  primary  output 
6  of 

We  assume  as  a  rule  of  usage  that  once  input  a  of  $  is  stimulated,  it 
will  not  be  stimulated  again  until  a  stimulus  has  been  emitted  from 
output  b  of  Under  this  assumption,  the  triple-return  counter  <£ 
works  like  this.  A  start  stimulus  into  a  goes  via  a  coding  and  decoding 
network  to  a+*,  where  it  starts  the  first  periodic  pulser,  and  also  to 
output  d,  where  it  is  relayed  to  the  input  of  C2 .  After  a  delay,  the 
output  61  of  the  first  periodic  pulser  will  send  stimuli  along  row  14  to 
impinge  on  confluent  cell  F14,  which  functions  as  a  gate.  When  the 
output  pulse  from  C2  enters  <£  at  c,  it  travels  along  row  20  and  into 
column  D,  stimulating  the  three  gates  F14,  F8,  and  F2.  Only  the 
first  of  these  gates  (F14)  is  open;  the  pulse  passes  through  this  gate, 
turns  the  first  periodic  pulser  off,  turns  the  second  periodic  pulser 
on,  and  passes  along  row  13  and  column  J  to  the  secondary  output  d. 

The  next  pulse  entering  secondary  input  c  from  C2  turns  off  the 
second  pulser,  turns  on  the  third  pulser,  and  goes  from  secondary 
output  d  back  to  C2  .  When  this  pulse  returns  from  C2 ,  it  turns  off 
the  third  pulser  and  passes  out  the  primary  output  b.  This  completes 
the  operation  of  <f>. 

Note  that  the  path  from  primary  input  a  to  cell  F18  crosses  the 
path  from  secondary  input  c  to  cell  D14>  Actually,  no  harm  results 
from  the  primary  input  stimulus  going  to  cell  D14  and  thence  to 
gates  F14,  F8,  and  F2,  since  these  gates  are  initially  closed.  But  if 
the  pulses  from  c  to  D14  entered  cell  F18,  a  malfunction  would  result. 
This  is  a  special  case  of  the  general  problem  of  wire-crossing.  The 
general  problem  is  solved  by  means  of  the  coded  channel  of  Section 
3.6  below.  The  special  problem  is  solved  in  <£  by  means  of  the  coder 
B17,  B18,  C17,  C18,  which  produces  101  when  stimulated,  and  the 
decoder  D18,  D19,  E18,  E199F18,  F19,  which  emits  a  1  to  F17  and 
G18  when  it  is  stimulated  by  101,  but  not  when  it  is  stimulated  by  1. 

The  design  principle  of  the  triple-return  counter  can  easily  be  modi- 
fied and  generalized  to  give  a  counter  which  will  count  m  pulses;  that 
is,  will  emit  every  mJth  pulse  it  receives.] 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




The  three  organs  that  we  constructed  in  Sections  3.2  and  3.3  were 
basic  entities  of  rather  general  significance.  The  next  ones  will  be 
much  more  special;  they  correspond  to  specific  needs  that  will  arise 
in  the  course  of  the  first  major,  composite  construction  that  we  must 
undertake.  Their  names,  which  refer  to  very  special  functions,  also 
express  this  fact. 

The  first  organ  in  this  series  is  the  triple-return  counter.  This  organ 
has  two  inputs  a,  c  and  two  outputs  6,  d;  a,  b  are  the  primary  input- 
output  pair  and  c,  d  are  the  secondary  input-output  pair. 

In  order  to  describe  its  functioning,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  that 
its  secondary  output  d  and  its  secondary  input  c  are  attached  to  the 
input  c*  and  the  output  d*,  respectively,  of  an  (arbitrarily  given) 
other  organ.  This  other  organ  is  the  responding  organ,  and  we  will, 
for  the  time  being,  give  it  the  symbol  12.  Having  been  thus  attached 
to  12,  the  triple-return  organ  now  has  only  its  primary  input-output 
pair  a,  b  free.  Its  desired  functioning  is  as  follows. 

Upon  stimulation  at  a  it  responds  at  d  and  thereby  stimulates  at 
c*.  Assume  that  12  responds,  after  a  suitable  delay,  at  rf*,  stimulating 
c.  This  causes  a  second  response  at  d,  and  hence  a  stimulation  of  12 
at  c*.  Assume  that  12  responds  for  the  second  time,  after  a  suitable  de- 
lay, at  d*,  stimulating  at  c.  This  causes  a  third  response  at  rf,  and 
hence  a  stimulation  of  12  at  c*.  Assume  that  12  responds  at  d*  for  the 
third  time,  after  a  suitable  delay,  stimulating  at  c.  This  causes  a 
response  at  b  and  terminates  the  process. 

The  relation  between  the  original  actuation  at  a  and  the  ultimate 
response  at  b  is  freely  timed;  i.e.,  the  delay  between  these  is  not 
prescribed  at  this  point.  Note  that  the  total  process  from  a  to  b  has 
three  phases,  namely  the  three  passages  from  d  through  c*  and  d* 
(i.e.,  through  12)  to  c,  whose  delays  depend  in  any  event  on  the  re- 
sponding organ  12,  and  not  on  the  organ  to  be  constructed  now.  How- 
ever, the  other  phases  of  the  total  process  from  a  to  b  (i.e.,  those  from 
a  to  d,  twice  from  c  to  d,  and  finally  from  c  to  b)  depend  solely  on  the 
organ  to  be  constructed  now.  It  is  to  these  that  the  above  observation 
about  free  timing,  i.e.,  the  absence  of  prescriptions  of  specific  delay 
lengths,  applies  (cf.,  however,  the  remarks  at  the  end  of  this  sec- 
tion). 

The  triple-return  counter  has  the  symbol  <i>. 

The  required  network  is  successively  developed  in  Figure  24.  This 
construction  and  the  network  that  results  from  it  are  discussed  in  the 
balance  of  this  section. 

We  require  that  the  stimulation  should  pass  precisely  three  times 
from  c*  to  d*  (i.e.,  through  12).  Or,  which  is  more  to  the  point,  we 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


require  that  when  a  stimulus  arrives  at  c  (from  d*  of  12)  the  first 
two  times,  the  consequences  (in  <i>)  should  be  different  from  those 
that  take  place  the  third  time.  Hence  <£  needs  a  memory  that  can 
distinguish  the  first  two  occasions  from  the  third  one,  i.e.,  keep  a 
count  up  to  three. 

With  ourpresent  means  this  is  best  achieved  by  three  periodic 
pulsers  PP(T),  each  of  which  is  turned  on  (started)  at  the  beginning 
of  the  count-period  that  it  represents,  and  turned  off  (stopped)  at 
its  end.  During  that  count-period,  the  corresponding  PP(T)  effec- 
tively indicates  the  presence  of  the  count-period  by  the  (continuous) 
availability  of  its  output  stimulus.  This  stimulus  must  then  be  used 
to  achieve  the  characteristic  operations  of  the  count-period  in  ques- 
tion. These  are  the  following. 

First  count-period:  A  stimulus  arriving  at  c  is  routed  to  d,  and 
after  this  the  PP(1)  of  the  first  period  is  turned  off  and  that  of  the 
second  period  is  turned  on. 

Second  count-period:  A  stimulus  arriving  at  c  is  routed  to  d,  and 
after  this  the  PP(1)  of  the  second  period  is  turned  off  and  that  of 
the  third  period  is  turned  on. 

Third  count-period:  A  stimulus  arriving  at  c  is  routed  to  6,  and 
after  this  the  PP  (T)  of  the  third  period  is  turned  off. 

The  initial  stimulus  at  a  must,  of  course,  be  routed  to  c,  and  it 
must  also  turn  on  the  PP(1)  of  the  first  period. 

The  obvious  way  in  which  the  continuous  emissions  of  a  PP(T) 
can  be  used  to  induce  the  desired  consequences  that  are  characteristic 
of  its  count-period  (cf.  above),  with  the  help  of  the  stimulus  at  d 
that  actuates  the  period  in  question,  is  this.  Use  a  confluent  state  C 
as  a  coincidence  organ  by  giving  it  the  route  from  the  output  of  the 
PP(T)  referred  to  above  and  the  route  from  c  as  inputs  (whose 
coincident  stimulations  it  is  to  sense).  Then  use  this  C  to  initiate 
the  characteristic  responses  enumerated  above.  [See  cells  F14,  F8, 
and  F2  of  Figure  23.  Von  Neumann  thinks  of  the  stimulus  at  d  (i.e., 
c*)  as  actuating  a  given  count-period.  This  stimulus  will  pass  through 
Q,  and  enter  <I>  at  c  (i.e.,  d*).] 

All  these  arrangements  are  shown  in  Figure  24a.  Note  that  in  this 
figure  the  inputs  and  the  output  of  the  PP  are  designated  by  d+ ,  d-  and 
b  (instead  of  a+ ,  a-  and  6,  as  in  Figs.  19g  and  19h).  The  upper  and  the 
lower  edges  of  the  PP  are  protected  by  U's,  to  prevent  unwanted 
stimulations  by  C's  across  these  boundaries.  It  is  convenient  not  to 
extend  this  protection  to  the  left  lower  corner  of  each  PP  (to  make 
room  for  a  transmission  channel  there);  that  this  is  permissible  is 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




not  indicated  by  Figure  19h,  but  it  is  by  Figure  19g.  [See  also  Figures 
16b  and  18k.] 

In  Figures  24a  and  24b  the  following  simplifications  are  used:  A 
straight  line  of  states  0.  is  designated  by  a  single  arrow,  and  similarly 
for  the  three  other  directions.  A  connected  area  of  states  U  is  cross- 
hatched.  The  PP  (T)  are  not  shown  in  their  true  size  (which  is  4  X  15; 
cf.  Fig.  19g);  the  area  of  the  network  of  Figure  24a  is  therefore 
correspondingly  contracted  horizontally  and  vertically. 

Figure  24a  does  not  show  how  the  transmission  channels  of  the 
secondary  input-output  pair  c,  d  and  of  the  primary  input  a  reach 
their  proper  endings  at  c  =  d*,  d  =  c*  and  a,  respectively.  (In  the 
figure  c  =  d*,  d  =  c*  are  shown;  a  is  not  shown  but  should  be  thought 
of  as  lying  towards  the  lower  left  corner.)  In  the  figure  the  transmis- 
sion channels  in  question  end  at  Ci  or  c2 ,  at  d',  and  at  a/  or  a2', 
respectively.  The  primary  output  b  is  shown  reaching  its  proper 
ending.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  connecting  d  with  d,  but  there  is  a 
serious  topological  difficulty  in  connecting  Ci  or  c2  with  c  and  at  the 
same  time  a/  or  a*  with  a  (without  disturbing  the  connections  of  b 
and  of  d  in  the  process) :  It  is  clear  that  these  paths  must  cross.  Note 
that  it  is  not  a  rigid  requirement  that  a,  b,  c,  d  be  at  the  positions 
indicated  in  the  figure  (regarding  a,  cf.  the  above  remark);  i.e., 
a,  b,  c,  d  could  be  moved  around  somewhat.  However,  it  is  necessary 
that  a,  b  be  on  the  left  edge  of  the  network  and  that  c,  d  be  on  its 
right  edge  (cf.  later  [Fig.  39]),  and  this  implies  the  topological  diffi- 
culty referred  to  above,  i.e.,  the  necessity  of  crossing  paths.  We  may 
therefore  just  as  well  leave  a,  6,  c,  d  in  the  positions  indicated  above. 
We  must  solve  the  problem  of  how  to  cross  the  channel  from  c%  or 
c2f  to  c  and  that  one  from  a/  or  a2'  to  a  without  corruption  of  informa- 
tion by  interference,  i.e.,  without  the  information  intended  for  one 
channel  getting  into  the  other  one,  and  thereby  causing  malfunctions 
in  the  network. 

The  problem  of  crossing  lines  (which  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  2- 
dimensional  case;  cf.  Chapter  1  and  also  later)  will  be  solved  in  a 
general  form  by  the  construction  of  a  specific  organ  for  this  purpose 
later  on  [Sec.  3.6].  However,  its  present  occurrence  is  particularly 
simple,  and  it  does  therefore  not  seem  worthwhile  to  appeal  to  the 
general  procedure  referred  to,  but  it  is  preferable  to  solve  it  ad  hoc. 

The  main  simplification  present  is  that,  while  it  is  necessary  to 
keep  signals  in  the  channel  from  c  to  Ci  or  c2'  from  getting  into  the 
channel  from  a  to  a/  or  a2',  the  reverse  is  not  necessary.  Indeed,  the 
first  type  of  cross-talk  between  these  channels  would  cause  a  pulse 
to  cycle  indefinitely  between  the  responding  organ  ft  and  the  triple- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


return  counter  <i>,  thereby  completely  vitiating  the  operation.  The 
second  type  of  cross-talk,  on  the  other  hand,  merely  injects  the 
original  stimulus  (from  a)  into  the  Ci  -c2  channel,  thereby  furnishing 
a  stimulus  to  each  one  of  the  three  coincidence-sensing  C's  (these 
are  2  squares  to  the  right  of  the  d  channel  at  the  left  edge  of  the 
figure).  An  examination  of  the  delays  (cf.  below)  will  show  that  at 
this  time  none  of  the  PP(l)  is  turned  on  yet,  and  therefore  none  of 
the  C's  in  question  receives  the  other  stimulus  required  for  a  coinci- 
dence. Hence,  the  misdirected  a-stimuli  of  this  class  are  harmless. 

Thus,  we  must  only  prevent  c-stimuli  from  getting  into  the  a/-a2' 
channel.  This  can  be  achieved  by  the  same  coding-and-decoding 
trick  that  we  will  use  subsequently  for  the  general  purpose  referred 
to  above  [see  Sec.  3.6].  That  is,  we  will  use  a  pulser  to  replace  an 
a-stimulus  by  a  (coded)  sequence  of  stimuli,  and  protect  ai'-a2'  by 
placing  a  decoder  in  front  of  it  which  will  respond  only  to  this  sequence 
of  stimuli  and  not  to  a  single  stimulus.  In  this  way  an  a-stimulus,  in 
its  expanded  (coded)  form,  will  be  able  to  get  through  to  ai'-a2'; 
while  a  c-stimulus,  which  remains  single,  will  not  be  able  to  reach 
ai'-a/.  In  addition,  it  is  not  worthwhile  to  appeal  at  this  point  to  our 
previous  constructions  of  pulsers  and  decoders,  but  it  is  simplest  to 
make  up  the  necessary  primitive  organs  specifically  for  the  present 
purpose. 

The  coding  of  an  a-stimulus  need  only  be  its  replacement  by  two 
stimuli,  and  it  is  somewhat  more  convenient  to  choose  these  as  not 
immediately  consecutive.  That  is,  we  are  using  101  rather  than  IT. 
This  makes  the  coding,  as  well  as  the  decoding  operation  quite  simple. 
The  arrangements  that  achieve  this  are  shown  in  Figure  24b.  (Note 
that  Fig.  24b  extends  the  lower  end  of  Fig.  24a.  Inspection  of  the 
two  figures  shows  clearly  what  their  common  elements  are,  i.e.,  in 
what  manner  they  must  be  superposed.)  The  position  of  a  can  be  at 
ai  or  a2 .  This  stimulates  the  leftmost  C  which  sends  stimuli  over 
two  paths  with  a  differential  delay  of  2  to  its  right-hand  neighbor  jo . 
Thus  a  sequence  101  arrives  here,  if  the  stimulation  came  from  ai~a2 . 
Note  that  this  o  is  also  fed  by  a  to  immediately  under  it,  which 
represents  the  channel  coming  from  c.  Through  this  channel  only  a 
single  1  will  come  in.  Thus,  the  coding  of  an  ai-a2  stimulus  (and  the 
non-coding  of  a  c-stimulus)  has  already  taken  place  at  this  o  (imme- 
diately to  the  right  of  the  leftmost  C).  This  stimulates  the  second  C. 
From  here  this  stimulation  travels,  as  it  should,  unimpeded  to  c2' 
(whether  coded  or  not).  On  the  other  hand,  two  paths,  with  the 
differential  delay  2,  go  from  this  (the  second  from  the  left)  C  to  the 
next  (the  third  from  the  left)  C,  which  now  acts  as  a  coincidence 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




organ.  That  is,  this  last  C  will  respond  only  if  the  previous  C  had 
accepted  two  stimuli  with  the  compensating  delay  2,  i.e.,  a  sequence 
101.  In  other  words,  only  a  stimulus  coming  from  ai-a2  (and  not 
one  coming  from  c)  can  effect  (by  these  indirect  means)  a  stimulation 
of  this  last  C.  This  C  coincides  with  that  one  in  the  lower  left  corner 
of  Figure  24a,  i.e.,  with  the  one  adjacent  to  the  a\-(U  entries.  Thus, 
the  transmission  from  ai-a2  together  with  the  exclusion  from  c,  to 
a/-a2',  has  been  achieved,  as  desired. 

Note  that  a/  and  a/  have  both  been  utilized  (their  C  needed  two 
accesses;  cf.  above),  a  may  be  at  a\  or  a2 .  We  use  ai ,  since  we  want  a 
from  the  left.  Of  c/  and  c2'  we  have  utilized  c/,  and  Ci  need  not  be 
considered  further.  Figures  24a  and  24b  having  been  fitted  together, 
it  is  indicated  to  make  a  further  addition  to  the  left  edge.  Indeed,  it 
is  desirable  to  straighten  it,  and  to  protect  its  C's  (which  could  cause 
unwanted  stimulations  in  adjacent  transmission  states)  by  a  border 
of  IPs.  We  add  accordingly  a  border  of  IPs  which  fits  the  left  edge 
of  Figures  24a  and  24b  and  contains  the  necessary  channels  from  the 
new  position  of  a  to  the  old  one,  and  from  the  new  position  of  b  to 
the  old  one.  This  is  shown  in  Figure  24c,  the  position  relatively  to 
Figure  24b  being  indicated  by  the  dashed  line  there.  Finally,  we  fill 
the  strip  around  the  right  upper  corner  of  Figure  24a,  marked  with  a 
dashed  line,  with  IPs,  to  complete  the  rectangular  shape. 

This  completes  the  construction.  The  areas  PP(T)  in  Figure  24a 
have  the  width  15  and  the  height  4  according  to  Figure  19g.  Hence 
the  area  of  the  network  of  Figure  24a  spans  a  rectangle  of  width  21 
and  of  height  26.  This  has  the  consequence  that  the  (rectangular) 
area  of  the  entire  network  (resulting  from  Figs.  24a-c)  has  the  width 
24  and  the  height  26.  An  abbreviated  representation  of  this  network 
is  given  in  Figure  24d.  Figures  24c  and  24d  are  further  contracted  in 
comparison  with  Figures  24a  and  24b. 

The  delay  from  a  to  ai  is  clearly  1  (cf.  Fig.  24c);  the  delay  from 
ai  (through  three  C's,  and  paying  attention  to  the  fact  that  because 
of  the  coding-decoding  procedure  used,  the  shorter  path  between  the 
two  first  C's  must  be  combined  with  the  longer  one  between  the  two 
last  C's,  or  vice  versa,  the  same  delay  resulting  in  both  ways)  to  a+ 
is  11  (cf.  Fig.  24b  for  this  and  for  several  estimates  that  follow). 
This  is  also  the  delay  to  the  output  of  the  io  immediately  to  the  right 
of  the  last  C,  i.e.,  to  the  entrance  of  the  straight  channel  leading  to 
d.  The  delay  through  that  channel  to  d  (taking  the  true  length  of 
PP(T)  into  consideration,  which  is  15  according  to  Fig.  19g)  is  18. 
The  delay  from  a+  through  PP  (1 )  to  b  is  18  (cf .  the  end  of  Sec.  3.2.1 ) . 
The  delay  from  b  to  the  first  coincidence-C  (2  squares  to  the  right  of 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


C  at  C1-C2  in_Fig.  24a;  it  must  again  be  remembered  that  the  true 
length  of  PP(T)  is  15  and  that  the  true  distance  of  b  from  the  top  of 
PP(T)  is  2;  cf.  Fig.  19g)  is  22.  Thus,  the  total  delay  from  a  to  the 
first  stimulation  of  £2  at  d  =  c*  is  1  +  11  +  18  =  30.  Furthermore, 
the  total  delay  from  a  to  the  moment  when  the  first  coincidence-C 
becomes  passable  for  stimuli  coming  from  c/-c2'  (because  it  is  being 
stimulated  from  the  first  PP(1);  cf.  Fig.  24a)  is  1  +  11  +  18  + 
22  =  52. 

Note  that  it  takes  a  pulse  from  ai  that  gets  from  the  second  C 
from  the  left  into  the  Ci  -c2  channel,  a  delay  of  5  or  of  7  (depending 
on  which  of  the  two  available  paths  between  the  two  first  C's  is 
followed;  cf.  Fig.  24b)  to  get  there  (i.e.,  to  emerge  on  the  upper  side 
of  the  second  C).  The  delay  from  here  to  c2'  is  5  (since  the  true 
height  of  PP(T)  is  4;  cf.  Fig.  19g),  and  from  there  to  the  first  coinci- 
dence-C (cf.  Fig.  24a)  is  3.  Hence,  the  total  delay  from  a  to  the  first 
coincidence-C  through  this  illegitimate  channel,  is  1+  5  +  5  +  3  = 
14,  or  1  +  7  +  5  +  3  =  16.  This  delay  increases  by  9  for  the  second 
coincidence-C,  and  by  8  more  for  the  third  one.  Hence  it  is  at  most 
16  +  9  =  25  and  25  +  8  =  33  for  these  C,  i.e.,  at  most  33  overall. 
Now  we  saw  that  even  the  first  coincidence-C  becomes  passable  for 
stimulation  from  the  Ci-c2  channel  only  with  a  delay  of  52  after  the 
stimulation  at  a.  (For  the  other  coincidence-C  this  delay  is,  of  course, 
still  longer.)  Hence  this  illegitimate  stimulation  comes  too  soon  to 
cause  trouble,  confirming  our  earlier  assertion  to  this  effect. 

[Von  Neumann  next  considered  the  i'th  response  of  £2  at  c  =  d*, 
for  i  =  1,  2,  3.  He  calculated  the  delays  through  $  for  each  response 
and  made  sure  that  the  internal  timing  was  correct.  The  crucial  point 
about  timing  is  best  explained  in  connection  with  Figure  23.  Consider 
the  pulse  which  constitutes  the  first  response  of  12;  let  t  be  the  time 
it  arrives  at  cell  D14.  At  time  t  gate  F14  is  open  and  gates  F8  and 
F2  are  closed.  This  pulse  will  pass  through  gate  F14  and,  among 
other  things,  enter  input  a+2  (at  time  t  +  9)  to  start  the  second 
periodic  pulser,  which  will  in  turn  open  gate  F8.  Will  gate  F8  be 
opened  in  time  to  let  the  original  pulse  through  to  start  the  third 
periodic  pulser,  thereby  creating  a  malfunction?  A  calculation  of  the 
delays  along  the  two  paths  to  cell  F8  shows  that  this  will  not  happen: 
the  original  pulse  reaches  F8  from  the  left  at  time  t  +  12,  while  the 
gating  pulse  reaches  F8  from  the  right  at  time  t  +  49.  A  similar 
calculation  shows  that  there  is  no  trouble  at  gate  F2.\ 

This  completes  the  discussion  of  the  delays  within  $  and  the  proof 
of  the  consistency  of  its  functioning.  We  restate  those  of  <£'s  delay 
characteristics  that  are  externally  relevant:  from  the  stimulation  at 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




a  to  the  first  stimulation  of  £2:  30;  from  the  first  response  of  12  to  the 
second  stimulation  of  12:  66;  from  the  second  response  of  12  to  the 
third  stimulation  of  12:  83;  from  the  third  response  of  12  to  the  output 
at  b  (Fig.  24d):59. 

Let  the  delay  from  z'th  stimulation  of  12  to  its  i'th  response  be 
Wi  (i  =  1,  2,  3).  (This  is  a  property  of  12,  not  of  <£!)  Then  the  total 
delay  from  a  through  <£  (and  three  times  through  12!)  to  6  is  30  + 
wx  +  66  +  w2  +  83  +  wz  +  59  =  238  +  wx  +  w2  +  wz  . 

3.5  The  1  vs.  10101  Discriminator:  Structure, 
Dimensions,  and  Timing 

The  next  organ  in  this  series  is  the  I  vs.  10101  discriminator.  This 
organ  has  an  input  a  and  two  outputs  b,  c.  It  performs  a  function 
that  we  have  consciously  refrained  from  postulating  for  the  decoder 
(cf.  the  beginning  of  Sec.  3.3) :  it  discriminates  between  two  sequences, 
one  of  which  is  part  of  the  other.  To  be  specific,  the  arrival  of  a  single 
stimulus  at  a  causes  an  emission  at  6,  provided  that  it  is  preceded  by 
a  no-stimulus  sequence  of  sufficient  length.  The  arrival  of  a  sequence 
10101  at  a  causes  an  emission  at  c  (but  not  at  6;  i.e.,  it  paralyzes  the 
effect  of  the  single  stimulus  that  it  contains;  cf.  above).  .  .  . 

The  relation  between  the  actuating  sequences  1  (or  rather  0  •  •  •  01; 
cf.  above)  and  10101  at  a  and  the  response  at  6  and  c  is  freely  timed; 
i.e.,  the  delay  between  these  is  not  prescribed  at  this  point.  .  .  . 

The  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  has  the  symbol  ^r. 

[  Von  Neumann  next  developed  his  network  for  For  a  reason  to  be 
explained,  we  have  replaced  his  design  of  ^  by  a  simpler  one. 

The  discriminator^  is  used  in  reading  an  arbitrary  cell  xn  of  the 
infinite  linear  array  L  (Fig.  37).  "Zero"  is  represented  in  cell  xn  by 
the  unexcitable  state  U,  and  "one"  is  represented  by  the  quiescent 
but  excitable  state  T030 ,  which  is  an  ordinary  transmission  state 
directed  downward.  Cell  xn  is  read  by  sending  the  sequence  10101 
to  input  Vi  of  connecting  loop  Ci  and  noting  whether  1  or  10101 
emerges  from  output  Wi  of  Ci .  The  sequence  10101  travels  down  the 
upper  half  of  Ci  and  enters  cell  xn  .  If  cell  xn  is  in  state  U,  the  sequence 
1010  converts  xn  into  state  T030 ,  and  the  remaining  T  passes  through 
xn  and  travels  down  the  lower  half  of  Ci  to  output  Wi .  If  xn  is  already 
in  state  T030 ,  the  complete  sequence  10101  travels  around  Ci  and 
comes  out  at  W\ .  Hence  a  I  at  Wi  represents  a  "zero"  at  xn  ,  while  a 
10101  at  wi  represents  a  "one"  at  xn  .  The  T  vs.  10101  discriminator 
^  discriminates  between  these  two  cases. 

At  the  time  von  Neumann  designed  his  discriminator  he  did  not 
know  what  other  sequences  might  be  fed  into  it.  As  the  discriminator 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


is  actually  used  in  the  read-write-erase  unit  RWE  (Figs.  37  and  39), 
no  other  case  arises.  By  taking  advantage  of  this  knowledge,  and 
improving  von  Neumann's  design  in  another  respect,  we  can  greatly 
simplify  both  his  discussion  and  his  design.  For  this  reason  we  replace 
von  Neumann's  discriminator  by  Figure  25. 

Assume  as  a  rule  of  usage  that  is  normally  quiescent,  but  that  on 
occasion  either  the  sequence  10000  or  the  sequence  10101  enters 
input  a,  starting  at  time  t,  and  that  once  one  of  these  two  sequences 
enters  input  a,  no  further  stimuli  enter  input  a  untile  is  quiescent 
again. 

We  will  consider  the  two  cases  separately.  In  the  first  case,  1  enters 
input  a  at  time  t,  travels  along  the  path  indicated  by  the  long  arrow, 
and  is  emitted  from  b  at  time  t  +  40.  This  1  also  enters  the  decoder 
D (10101),  but  it  dies  there.   

In  the  second  case  the  sequence  10101  enters  a  at  times  t  through 
t  +  4,  producing  two  immediate  effects.  First,  the  sequence  10101  is 
decoded  by  D  (10101),  so  that  a  single  pulse  emerges  from  output 
b1  at  time  t  +  21.  Second,  the  sequence  travels  along  the  path  from 
input  a  to  output  b,  entering  cell  J 14  at  times  t  +  38  through  t  +  42. 
This  sequence  would  later  be  emitted  from  output  6,  except  that  it  is 
blocked  by  the  killing  action  from  cell  J 13  in  the  following  way.  The 
pulse  from  b1  enters  a  at  time  t  +  24,  so  P  (11111)  sends  stimuli  into 
cell  J 14  at  times  t  +  39  through  t  +  43.  This  means  that  any  pulse 
entering  cell  J 14  from  cell  114  during  times  t  +  38  to  t  +  43  inclusive 
is  lost.  Since  the  sequence  10101  enters  cell  J 14  from  the  left  at  times 
t  +  38  through  t  +  42,  it  is  destroyed  and  there  is  no  output  from  6. 
The  pulse  from  b1  at  time  t  +  21  is  emitted  from  output  c  at  time 
t  +  25. 

Combining  both  cases  we  have,  for  the  discriminator  of  Figure 
25 :  if  10000  enters  input  a  at  times  t  through  t  +  4,  a  stimulus  emerges 
from  output  b  at  time  t  +  40,  and  nothing  comes  from  output  c;  while 
if  10101  enters  input  a  at  times  t  through  t  +  4,  a  stimulus  emerges 
from  output  c  at  time  t  +  25,  and  nothing  comes  from  output  b. 
Hence     performs  the  required  discrimination. 

We  now  summarize  the  characteristics  of  the  discriminator  ^  of 
Figure  25  and  von  Neumann's  design,  putting  the  parameters  for  his 
design  in  parentheses.  The  1  vs.  10101  discriminator^  has  width  10 
(22),  height  14  (20);  the  input  a  is  8  (1)  cells  above  the  bottom,  the 
output  6  is  0  (6)  cells  above  the  bottom,  and  output  c  is  13  (18)  cells 
above  the  bottom.  The  delay  from  input  a  to  output  b  is  40  (86), 
and  the  delay  from  input  a  to  output  c  is  25  (49).  It  is  possible  to 
make  a  much  smaller  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  than  Figure  25,  but 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




Figure  25  is  in  the  spirit  of  von  Neumann's  design  and  is  quite  satis- 
factory for  our  purposes. 

Discriminating  between  the  two  sequences  1  and  10101  is  a  special 
case  of  the  general  task  of  discriminating  among  binary  sequences. 
Another  instance  of  this  general  task  occurs  in  the  coded  channel  of 
the  next  section.  Von  Neumann  solved  the  problem  there  by  using 
sets  of  sequences  such  that  no  sequence  bitwise  implies  (is  covered  by) 
any  other,  even  if  the  sequences  are  shifted  in  time  relative  to  one 
another.  The  sequences  1011,  1101,  1110  constitute  such  a  set.  For 
the  sake  of  completeness  we  note  that  the  general  task  of  discriminat- 
ing among  binary  sequences  could  be  accomplished  by  a  unit  which 
"recognized"  a  given  sequence  and  no  other.  An  example  of  a  recog- 
nizer is  given  in  Figure  26. 

The  recognizer  R  (101001)  of  Figure  26  performs  the  following 
function.  Suppose  that  at  (relative)  times  0  through  5  a  sequence 
iHHHHH6  enters  input  a,  and  assume  that  this  sequence  is  both  pre- 
ceded and  followed  by  several  zeros.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
recognizer  R  (101001)  emits  a  stimulus  from  output  b  at  time  48  if 
and  only  if  the  entering  sequence  is  101001  (i.e.,  i1,  i,  i6  are  1  and 
i2,  i,  i  are  0).  We  will  explain  how  the  recognizer  R  (101001)  accom- 
plishes its  purpose.  The  general  principle  (algorithm)  for  designing 
an  arbitrary  recognizer  R(iH'2  •  •  •  in)  will  be  evident  at  the  end  of 
this  explanation. 

The  following  conditions  obtain. 

(I)  The  decoder  D (101001)  emits  a  pulse  from  output  b1  at  time 
23  if  and  only  if  i1,  f,  i6  are  all  1. 

(II)  The  pulser  P(1101)  emits  a  pulse  from  output  b2  at  time  23  if 
and  only  if  i2  or  i  or  i  is  1 . 

There  are  three  cases  to  consider. 

(A)  First  case:  the  input  sequence  is  101001,  i.e.,  i1,  i3,  i6  are  1  and 
i2,  i,  i  are  0.  Nothing  comes  from  b2  or  63,  and  the  pulse  from 
output  b1  is  emitted  from  output  b  at  time  48. 

(B)  Second  case:  i1,  i,  i6  are  1  and  one  or  more  of  i2,  i,  i  are  1. 
Pulses  are  emitted  from  both  b1  and  b2  at  time  23.  These  pulses 
enter  the  confluent  state  15  at  time  29,  causing  a  pulse  to  enter 
input  a  at  time  31.  The  pulser  P  (11111)  emits  the  sequence 
11111,  which  enters  cell  Tl  at  times  47  through  51  inclusive. 
The  pulse  from  b1  at  time  23  zig-zags  along  rows  1  and  2y  entering 
cell  Tl  at  time  46,  and  is  destroyed  by  the  killing  action  of 
11111  into  cell  Tl.  Hence  nothing  is  emitted. 

(C)  Third  case:  not  all  of  i\  i,  %  are  1.  No  pulse  is  emitted  from 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


output  61,  and  hence  none  from  output  6.  If  a  pulse  is  emitted 
from  62,  it  is  blocked  at  confluent  state  15. 
This  concludes  our  discussion  of  the  recognizer  R (101001).] 

3.6  The  Coded  Channel 

3.6.1  Structure,  dimensions,  and  timing  of  the  coded  channel: 
[In  3-dimensional  space,  wires  can  cross  one  another  without 
intersecting,  that  is,  without  making  any  contact  which  transfers 
information  from  one  to  the  other.  In  2-dimensional  space  it  is 
topologically  necessary  for  communication  channels  to  intersect,  and 
so  there  is  a  problem  of  sending  information  down  a  channel  in  such 
a  way  that  it  does  not  appear  in  intersecting  channels.  This  problem 
could  be  solved  by  adding  a  wire-crossing  primitive.  Such  a  wire- 
crossing  primitive  would  itself  involve  extra  states,  and  it  would 
necessitate  additional  sensitized  states  for  the  direct  (construction) 
process.  Von  Neumann  solved  the  problem  in  his  29-state  cellular 
system  by  means  of  a  "coded  channel." 

Figure  27  shows  an  example  of  a  coded  channel  constructed  in 
accordance  with  von  Neumann's  algorithm.  There  are  inputs  ai  ,  a2 , 
a3  and  outputs  61,62,63;  each  input  at-  is  associated  with  the  corre- 
sponding output  (or  outputs)  hi .  Thus  a  pulse  into  input  a2  will 
eventually  appear  at  both  62  outputs  (not  simultaneously)  and 
nowhere  else.  The  coded  channel  is  made  up  of  seven  pulsers  and 
seven  decoding  organs  (all  shown  in  reduced  size),  together  with  a 
"main  channel"  running  from  the  output  of  P  (10011)  to  the  input 
of  D(llOOi). 

The  coding  is  done  with  six  sequences  of  length  five  such  that  none 
of  these  sequences  bitwise  implies  (is  covered  by)  any  other.  The 
sequences  11100,  11010,  11001,  10110,  10101,  10011  are  associated 
with  ai ,  a2 ,  a,z ,  61 ,  62 ,  63 ,  in  that  order.  The  way  the  sequences 
operate  is  best  explained  by  means  of  an  example.  Suppose  input  a2 
is  stimulated.  This  will  cause  pulser  P  (11010)  to  inject  its  charac- 
teristic 11010  into  the  main  channel.  This  sequence  will  travel  to  the 
end  of  the  main  channel,  but  because  it  is  distinct  from  every  other 
sequence  used  it  will  affect  only  decoder  D  (11010).  D  (11010)  will 
then  send  a  pulse  to  pulser  P  (10101),  which  will  inject  its  charac- 
teristics 10101  into  the  main  channel.  The  sequence  10101  will  travel 
to  the  end  of  the  main  channel,  but  because  it  differs  from  every  other 
sequence  used  it  will  affect  only  the  two  decoders  D  (10101),  both 
of  which  will  emit  pulses  from  their  outputs  62 . 

The  inputs  and  outputs  of  the  coded  channel  may  be  positioned  in 
any  order.  It  is  because  of  this  that  two  sequences  are  associated 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




with  each  input-output  pair,  the  conversion  from  one  sequence  to  its 
mate  taking  place  at  the  top  of  Figure  27. 

The  inputs  to  the  coded  channel  must  be  spaced  sufficiently  far 
apart  in  time  to  avoid  corruption  or  cross  talk.  For  suppose  ax  and 
a2  were  stimulated  so  their  outputs  11100  and  11010  followed  each 
other  immediately  in  the  main  channel.  The  combined  sequence 
1110011010  contains  the  sequence  11001  which  is  assigned  to  input 
a3 ,  and  hence  which  would  operate  D  (11001)  and  eventually  cause 
an  output  at  63 .] 

Our  third  construction  in  this  series  is  the  coded  channel.  Up  to 
now  it  has  been  our  policy  to  give  an  exact  and  exhaustive  descrip- 
tion and  discussion  of  each  organ  that  we  had  in  mind.  In  the  present 
case,  however,  it  is  preferable  to  depart  from  this  principle;  i.e.,  it  is 
much  simpler  and  quite  adequate  for  our  purposes  to  proceed  in  a 
more  heuristic  fashion.  We  will  therefore  discuss  more  broadly  what 
the  need  is  that  we  wish  to  satisfy  at  this  point,  and  by  what  means 
we  can  do  this.  We  will  then  deal  with  the  essential,  prototype  special 
cases,  and  develop  a  sufficient  discussion,  so  that  in  our  actual  subse- 
quent application  (cf.  later)  the  specific  organ  that  is  needed  will 
emerge  with  little  effort. 

The  coded  channel  performs  a  function  which  is  necessitated  by 
the  peculiar  narrowness  of  2-dimensional  space.  Indeed,  a  logical 
network  may  easily  require  crossing  of  lines  in  a  manner  which  cannot 
be  accommodated  in  2-dimensional  space.  For  example,  if  five  points 
a,  6,  c,  d,  e  are  given  and  every  one  of  them  is  to  be  connected  to  every 
other,  this  cannot  be  done  in  2  dimensions  without  intersections,  as 
schematically  shown  in  Figure  28a.  The  fine  connecting  c  to  e  is 
missing  in  this  figure  and  cannot  be  inserted  without  an  intersection. 
An  actual  instance  of  interconnections  requiring  intersections  occurred 
during  the  construction  of  the  triple-return  counter  (cf.  the  middle 
part  of  Section  3.4)  in  connection  with  the  development  of  Figure 
24b  from  Figure  24a. 

It  should  be  noted  that  this  difficulty  does  not  arise  in  3 -dimensional 
space.  However,  since  all  other  phases  of  our  constructions  can  be 
carried  out  in  2  dimensions,  just  as  well  as  in  3,  it  is  worthwhile  to 
keep  the  dimensionality  to  the  former,  low  value,  if  this  is  otherwise 
possible.  For  this  reason  we  accept  the  subordinate  difficulty  of  line- 
crossing  in  2  dimensions  and  the  necessity  of  special  constructions  to 
overcome  it. 

The  obvious  procedure  would  be  to  construct  a  special  organ  which 
performs  the  elementary  act  of  line-crossing,  as  schematically  shown 
in  Figure  28b.  A  more  detailed  representation  of  this  is  given  in  Figure 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


28d :  This  organ  has  two  inputs  a,  b  and  two  outputs  c,  d.  It  is  desired 
that  a  stimulation  of  input  a  elicit  (with  a  suitable  delay)  a  response 
at  output  d,  and  a  stimulation  at  input  b  (again  with  a  suitable,  and 
possibly  different  delay)  a  response  at  output  c.  Note  that  the  actual 
cyclical  arrangement  of  a,  6,  c,  d  is  essential:  if  they  are  arranged  as 
shown  in  Figure  28e — or  as  shown  schematically  in  Figure  28c — there 
would  obviously  be  no  difficulty  whatever. 

It  is  preferable  to  aim  immediately  at  somewhat  more  than  this. 
Indeed,  if  we  only  constructed  organs  as  indicated  in  Figure  28d 
which  effect  a  single  line-crossing,  we  would  have  to  combine  large 
numbers  of  these  in  our  subsequent  constructions.  This  would  lead 
to  quite  awkward  geometrical  configurations  and  make  our  general 
design  operations  rather  inconvenient.  It  is  therefore  better  to  con- 
struct a  multiple  line-crossing  organ,  in  the  sense  that  we  will  describe 
more  fully  below. 

A  multiple  line-crossing  organ  that  would  be  universally  useful  may 
be  described  as  follows.  It  is  a  rectangular  area  A,  as  shown  in  Figure 
28f,  on  whose  periphery  there  are  various  inputs  and  outputs.  These 
inputs  and  outputs  are  shown  in  Figure  28f,  and  in  Figures  28g-28k 
also,  as  bars.  Every  input  is  designated  by  a  symbol  av ,  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n; 
every  output  is  designated  by  a  symbol  bv ,  v  =  1,  ■  •  •  ,  n.  There  may 
be  several  av  with  the  same  v,  and  there  may  be  several  bv  with  the 
same  v.  The  order  in  which  all  of  these  av  and  bv  are  arranged  around 
the  periphery  of  A  may  be  prescribed  in  any  manner  whatsoever.  It 
is  desired  that  upon  stimulation  of  an  av  (i.e.,  of  any  one  of  the — 
possibly  several — a/s  with  the  v  under  consideration)  all  the  6/s 
(with  the  same  v)  should  respond,  with  appropriate  (and  not  neces- 
sarily equal)  delays. 

However,  for  the  purposes  for  which  this  device  will  be  needed,  a 
slightly  weaker  requirement  will  do  equally  well,  and  this  requirement 
will  be  somewhat  easier  to  implement,  as  will  appear  below.  This 
weakening  of  the  requirement  is  as  follows.  We  define  a  certain 
cyclical  sense  of  the  periphery  of  A,  as  shown  by  the  arrows  in  Figure 
28g.  We  then  break  this  cyclical  arrangement;  i.e.,  we  change  it  into 
a  linear  one,  by  cutting  it  at  the  point  designated  by  p — i.e.,  it  is 
now  thought  to  begin  at  p,  circle  the  periphery  of  A  in  the  direction 
of  the  arrows  and  end  again  at  p.  We  now  require  that  the  stimulation 
of  an  av  should  cause  responses  only  in  those  bv  (with  the  same  v ) 
which  He  ahead  of  the  av  in  question  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows. 
Finally  we  cut  the  periphery  of  A  open  at  p;  i.e.,  we  replace  it  by  an 
open  line.  This  line  may  be  straight  or  broken;  i.e.,  it  may  consist 
of  one  or  of  more  straight  pieces,  as  shown  in  Figure  28h-28k.  At 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




any  rate,  the  inputs  av  and  the  outputs  bv  remain  attached  to  it  as 
before,  but  we  may  also  change  (invert)  the  side  of  the  line  to  which 
they  are  attached.  (For  the  latter,  cf.  Fig.  28k.)  Figures  28h-28k 
also  show  that  we  keep  indicating  the  (previously  cyclical,  now 
linear)  sense  referred  to  above  by  arrows  (as  in  Fig.  28g),  and  we 
replace  the  point  p  by  pi  (beginning)  and  p2  (end). 

The  obvious  way  to  achieve  the  functioning  described  above  is  by 
coding  and  decoding.  To  do  this  we  correlate  to  every  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n 
a  suitable  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequence  %}  •  •  •  ivm.  (The  length  m 
of  the  sequence  %}  •  •  •  ivm  could  have  been  made  dependent  on  v, 
but  this  is  not  necessary.)  Now  we  attach  to  every  input  av  a  cod- 
ing organ  Y*(ivl  •  •  •  ivm),  and  to  every  output  bv  a  decoding  organ 
D(zV  •  •  •  ivm).  We  connect  all  these  inputs  and  outputs  by  a  con- 
nected line  of  (ordinary)  transmission  states — o  or  to  or  o  or  io, 
with  the  arrow  each  time  pointing  in  the  proper  direction — following 
the  path  indicated  by  the  arrows  in  the  illustrative  figure  (any  one 
of  the  Figs.  28h-28k  that  one  wishes  to  use  for  picturing  this  proce- 
dure). To  be  more  precise,  the  connecting  links  (for  the  entire  system 
of  a„'s  and  bv's)  must  consist  of  such  transmission  states.  This  is  also 
true  for  the  places  where  the  inputs  (the  av's)  are  tied  in.  However, 
at  the  places  where  the  outputs  (the  6/s)  are  tied  in,  the  stimulus 
must  be  able  to  progress  in  two  directions  (namely  along  the  subse- 
quent transmission  states  and  to  the  output  that  is  attached  at  the 
point  in  question).  Hence  at  each  one  of  these  places  a  confluent 
state  C  is  required.  This  chain  of  (ordinary)  transmission  states  and 
of  confluent  states  will  be  called  the  main  channel  of  the  organ. 

Figure  29  (which  may  be  viewed  as  an  elaboration  of  Figure  28i) 
shows  this  in  more  detail.  This  figure  shows  a  particular,  but  typical, 
distribution  of  a/s  and  6/s  (v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n)  with  n  =  2.  Note  that  in 
Figure  29  the  input  of  P(ivl  •  •  •  ivm)  is  at  the  distance  of  one  square 
from  the  true  input  av ,  and  is  designated  by  a/,  while  the  output  of 
P(z7  •  •  •  ivm)  is  designated  by  &/.  Also,  the  output  of  D(ivl  •  •  .  ivm) 
is  at  the  distance  of  one  square  from  the  true  output  bv ,  and  is  desig- 
nated by  6,",  while  the  input  to  Dfc1  •  •  •  ivm)  is  designated  by  a/'. 
Note,  furthermore,  that  each  P(z7  •  •  •  ivm)  or  D(z7  •  •  •  ivm)  may  be 
rotated  by  any  one  of  the  four  angles  0°,  90°,  180°,  270°,  and,  if  neces- 
sary, also  reflected  about  the  horizontal  or  the  vertical,  against  the 
standard  arrangements  in  Figures  16g  and  22c.  Clearly,  this  calls 
merely  for  trivial  transformations  of  the  constructions  of  Figures  16 
and  22,  respectively. 

We  must  now  select  the  sequences  ivl  •  •  •  i™,  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n.  Each 
bv ,  i.e.,  each  D^1  •••  ivm),  must  respond  to  the  i™  with 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


n  =  v,  and  to  no  other.  In  view  of  the  properties  of  the  D^'1  .  • .  im) 
{cf.  the  beginning  of  Sec.  3.3},  this  means  that  no  . . .  i™>  with 
fx  ^  v  must  contain  ivl  •  •  •  ivm.  In  order  to  avoid  "misunderstandings" 
due  to  mis -positioning  in  time,  this  requirement  must  also  be  extended 
to  the  case  when  %^  •  •  •  i™  and  ivl  •  •  •  i™  are  shifted  relatively  to 
each  other  (each  one  of  these  two  sequences  being  both  preceded  and 
followed  by  a  sufficiently  long  sequence  of  O's). 

This  is  certainly  the  case  if  the  ivl  •  •  •  ivm,  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n,  are  pair- 
wise  different,  and  if  all  of  them  begin  with  a  stimulus  and  contain 
the  same  total  number  k  of  stimuli.  We  assume,  therefore,  that  these 
conditions  are  fulfilled. 

Hence  our  problem  is  to  find  n  pairwise  different  sequences  iv2  •  •  •  ivm 
(we  need  not  consider  ivl,  since  it  is  1 ),  corresponding  to  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n, 
each  of  which  has  the  length  m  —  1  and  contains  precisely  k  —  1 
ones.  The  number  of  (different)  sequences  of  this  kind  is  obviously 

(m  -  l\ 
\k  -  \)' 

Consequently  the  choice  in  the  above  sense  is  possible  if  and  only  if 

(12-)  »s(r:!)- 

Therefore  the  only  task  remaining  on  this  count  is  that  of  choosing 
m,  k  so  that  they  fulfill  condition  (12'). 

It  would  be  unreasonable  to  choose  k  so  that  k  —  1,  too,  fulfills 
condition  (12')  {with  the  same  m}.  Hence 

(ra  —  l\       /m  —  l\ 
k  -\)>\k  -2)> 

which  means  k  —  1  <  m  —  k  +  1,2k  <  m  +  2,  and  so  2k  ^  m  +  1, 
i.e., 

(13') 

Actually  the  choices  k  =  (m  +  l)/2  and  k  =  m/2  are  usually  the 
practical  ones. 

These  discussions  make  it  clear  how  the  construction  of  the  coded 
channel  must  be  effected  in  each  specific  special  case  that  may  arise. 
We  will  use  for  its  abbreviated  representation  the  schemata  of  Figures 
28h-28k,  with  the  arrows  but  without  necessarily  including  the 
letters  p± ,  pi ,  and  with  each  cell  entry  or  exit  marked  with  its  av  or 
bv ,  to  the  extent  to  which  this  is  desirable. 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




There  still  remain  some  questions  of  detail  that  need  to  be  con- 
sidered.     

All  the  organs  P^',,1  •  •  •  ivm)  and  &(ivl  •  •  •  ivm)  of  Figure  29  have 
the  same  k  (cf.  Sees.  3.2.1  and  3.3  above),  and  therefore  the  same 
length  (cf.  Figs.  16g  and  22c).  As  Figure  29  shows,  the  P^V  • . .  i*) 
and  D(^V  •  •  •  ivm)  are  so  arranged  (oriented),  that  it  is  always  this 
length  that  defines  the  width  of  the  parallel  strip  along  the  main 
channel  that  they  occupy.  Hence  this  width  is  uniformly  2k.  Adding 
to  it  1  for  the  main  channel  and  2  for  two  protecting  strips  of  U's 
along  either  side,  we  obtain  the  entire  width  of  the  parallel  strip 
along  the  main  channel,  which  forms  the  organ  (i.e.,  the  coded 
channel):  2k  +  3.   

The  heights  of  the  various  organs  P(ivl  ■  •  •  ivm)  and  D(zV  •  •  •  ivm), 
u  +  2  with  their  various  u,  might  vary  a  priori  (cf.  Figs.  16g  and 
22c).  Inspection  of  the  definition  of  the  u  of  a  P(zV  •  •  •  ivm)  from 
its  u°  (cf.  (2')  and  the  remark  before  it  in  Sec.  3.2.1)  shows  that  the 
u  of  the  P(tV  •  •  •  ivm)  can  be  made  all  equal  (as  the  maximum  of  all 
u°).  Let  u  be  the  common  u  of  all  P(iV  •••  ivm).  Inspection  of 
the  definition  of  the  u  of  a  D(zV  •  •  •  iym)  from  its  u°  {cf.  equation 
(ll')  and  the  remark  before  it  in  Sec.  3.3}  shows  that  the  u  of  the 
D(tV  •  •  •  ivm)  can  be  made  all  equal  (as  the  maximum  of  all  u°)\ 
in  addition,  it  is  not  hard  to  verify  that  all  u°  are  automatically 
equal.  At  any  rate,  let  u  be  the  common  u  of  all  Dfe1  •  •  •  ivm). 

As  Figure  29  shows,  the  P(ipl  •  •  •  ivm)  and  D(ivl  •  •  -  i™)  are  so 
arranged  (oriented),  that  it  is  always  these  heights  that  define  the 
distances  of  the  organs  P(zV  •  •  •  ivm)  and  D(zV  •  •  •  ivm)  along  the 
main  channel.  However,  the  distances  obtained  in  this  way  are  in 
any  event  only  lower  limits:  whenever  it  is  desired  to  increase  the 
distance  between  two  neighboring  organs  {from  the  P(zV  •  •  •  ivm), 
D^',1  •  ■  ■  ivm)  class},  it  suffices  to  replace  the  single  separating  line 
of  U's  (as  shown  in  Fig.  29)  by  a  suitable,  larger  number  of  such  lines. 

The  next  question  relates  to  delays.  The  delay  from  the  stimula- 
tion at  a  particular  av  to  the  response  at  a  particular  bv  is  easily  deter- 
mined by  inspection  of  Figure  29.  The  [total]  delay  from  aj  through 
P(tV  ivm)  to  bj  is  d!  =  2k  +  u  +  2  (cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  3.2.1); 
the  delay  from  a"  through  D  (ivl  - . .  ivm)  to  b"  is  d"  =  3k  +  u  +  m 
(cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  3.3).  Let  A  be  the  distance  along  the  main  channel 
from  the  1  (or  to  or  or  io)  where  the  av  is  tied  in  to  the  C  where 
the  bv  is  tied  in  (taking  every  C  twice,  and  including  the  terminal 
C,  but  not  the  initial  t — or  to  or  1  or  io — into  the  count  of  squares, 
i.e.,  the  distance).  Then  the  total  delay  from  the  stimulation  at  av  to 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


the  response  at  bv  is  1  +  d!  +  2  +  A  +  1  +  d"  +  1  =  A  +  d'  + 
d"  +  5. 

We  must  also  consider  the  question  of  corruption  by  interference, 
which  assumes  here  the  following  shape.  Clearly  the  stimulation  at 
an  av  will  cause  a  response  at  every  bv  (assumed  to  lie  ahead  in  the 
direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main  channel).  Also,  the  stimulation 
at  an  av  will  not  cause  a  response  at  any  6M  with  /x  ^  *>,  provided  that 
no  other  stimulations  (at  one  or  more  ax's,  with  X's  among  which 
X  =  v  as  well  as  X  ^  v  may  occur)  have  taken  place.  The  question  is 
therefore :  Can  stimulations  at  several  a/s  (with  repeated  or  different 
v's)  cause  a  response  at  any  6M  ,  where  neither  of  the  stimulations 
referred  to  above  could  have  caused  a  response  by  itself?  Or,  to  be 
more  specific:  What  rules  must  we  establish  for  the  stimulations  at 
the  av ,  to  prevent  such  occurrences? 

These  rules  will  be  given  in  the  form  of  prescribing  certain  minimum 
delays  between  a  stimulation  at  an  av  and  a  simultaneous  or  subse- 
quent stimulation  at  any  other  a\  .  (This  includes  X  =  v  as  well  as 
X  v\  also  for  X  =  v  and  a  subsequent  stimulation  the  two  av  may 
or  may  not  be  the  same.) 

Consider,  accordingly,  a  6M  .  A  response  will  take  place  there  if  its 
Diin1  •••  inm)  receives,  at  its  a/',  a  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequence 
containing  •  •  -  iMm.  Each  av  can  produce  a  sequence  ivl  ■  • .  i™. 
What  we  must  prevent  is  that  a  superposition  of  several  shifted  speci- 
mens of  these  should  contain  a  •  •  •  i™  which  did  not  actually 
occur  (in  the  correctly  shifted  position)  as  one  of  them. 

This  could  only  occur  if  two  shifted  ivl  •  •  •  ivm  (of  different  origin) 
contributed  together  (but  neither  of  them  separately!)  ^  k  stimuli 
to  the  same  sequence  j1  •  •  •  jm.  Let  this  sequence  jl  •  •  •  jm  have  subse- 
quences of  lengths  m \  m" ,  respectively,  in  common  with  these  two 
sequences  ivl  •  •  •  ivm.  Then  m',  m  ^  1,  m  +  m  ^  k.  The  distance 
of  the  beginnings  of  the  two  shifted  sequences  ivl  •  •  •  ivm  must  then 
be  either  ^  |  m  —  m"  \  (if  they  are  both  at  the  same  end  of  the 
sequence  jl  •  •  •  jm)  or  ^  2m  —  m  —  m  (if  they  are  at  opposite 
ends  of  the  sequence  j1  •  •  •  jm).  The  former  is  ^  k  —  1,  the  latter 
is  ^  2m  —  k,  and  (since  (12')  requires  k  ^  m)  k  —  1^2m  —  k. 
Hence  the  distance  in  question  is  at  any  rate  ^  2m  —  k.  Hence  the 
occurrence  in  question  is  excluded  if  the  distance  (of  the  beginnings) 
of  the  two  shifted  sequences  ivl  •  •  •  ivm  is  >  2m  —  k,  i.e.,  ^  2m  + 
1  -  k. 

Consider  therefore  two  inputs  av ,  a\  ,  such  that  the  output  6M  lies 
ahead  of  them  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main  channel. 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  OKGANS 




(For  the  relationships  between  v,  X,  and  between  av ,  a\ ,  cf.  above.) 
By  interchanging  av ,  a\  ,  if  necessary,  let  ax  lie  ahead  of  av  in  the 
direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main  channel.  Let  the  distances 
from  the  tie-in  points  of  av ,  a\  to  that  one  of  6M  be  A7,  A77,  respectively, 
and  between  the  tie-in  points  of  av  and  of  a\  (taking  every  C  twice, 
and  including  one,  but  not  the  other  endpoint,  into  the  count  of 
squares,  i.e.,  the  distance)  A*  =  A7  —  A77. 

Now  let  av ,  a\  be  stimulated  at  the  times  t\  t11,  respectively.  Then 
the  sequences  ivl  •  •  •  i™,  ix1  •  •  •  i\m,  that  are  thus  created,  appear  at 
a/'  at  the  times  t1  +  1  +  d!  +  2  +  A7  +  1,  t11  +  1  +  d!  +  2  + 
A77  +  1,  respectively.  The  difference  of  these  is  (t1  +  A7)  —  (t11  + 
A77)  =  (t1  —  t11)  +  A*.  Hence  our  above  condition  becomes 
|  (t1  -  t11)  +  A*  |  ^  2m  +  1  -  k.  This  means,  that  either  (t1  - 
t11)  +  A*  ^  2m  +  1  -  fc,  i.e., 

(14')  t1  ^  t11  +  (2m  +  1  -  k  -  A*), 

or  (t1  -  t11)  +  A*  ^  -  (2m  +  1  -  k),  i.e., 

(15')  t11  ^  t1  +  (2m  +  1  -  k  +  A*). 

At  this  point  it  is  best  to  distinguish  certain  special  cases,  as 
follows. 

First,  t1  ^  277,  i.e.,  a  stimulation  (at  av ,  time  t1)  is  followed  by  a 
stimulation  ahead  of  it  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main 
channel  (at  a\  ,  time  £77).  First  subcase:  A*  <  2m  +  1  —  k.  In  this 
case  condition  (14')  is  unfulfillable  and  condition  (15')  requires  that 
the  delay  (from  t1  to  £77)  be  ^  (2m  +  1  —  k)  +  A*.  Second  subcase: 
A*  ^  2m  +  1  —  k.  In  this  case  condition  (14')  requires  that  the 
delay  from  (t1  to  t11)  be  ^  A*  —  (2m  +  1  —  k)  and  condition  (15') 
requires  that  it  be  ^  (2m  +  1  —  A: )  +  A  *. 

Second,  t1  ^  £77,  i.e.,  a  stimulation  (at  ax  ,  time  t11)  is  followed  by 
a  stimulation  behind  it  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main 
channel  (at  av ,  time  t1).  Third  subcase:  A*  <  2m  +  1  —  k.  In 
this  case  condition  (14')  requires  that  the  delay  (from  t11  to  t1) 
be  ^  (2m  +  1  —  k)  —  A*,  and  condition  (15')  is  unfulfillable. 
Fourth  subcase:  A*  ^  2m  +  1  —  k.  In  this  case  condition  (14')  is 
automatically  fulfilled  and  condition  (15')  is  unfulfillable. 

These  four  subcases  can  now  be  summarized,  forming  a  rule,  whose 
observance  excludes  corruption  by  interference.  This  rule  is  given  in 
what  follows. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


If  there  has  been  a  stimulation  at  an  input  ap  ,  then  a  stimula- 
tion at  an  input  aff  is  only  permissible  with  a  delay  d  (^0), 
subject  to  the  following  conditions. 

Let  the  distance  between  the  tie-in  points  of  ap  and  of  a„ 
(taking  every  C  twice,  and  including  one,  but  not  the  other 
endpoint,  into  the  count  of  squares,  i.e.,  the  distance)  be 

(16')  A*^°>- 

First  case:  aa  lies  ahead  of  ap  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows 

along  the  main  channel.  Then  either  d  ^  (2m  +  1  —  k)  + 

A*,  or,  if  A*  ^  2m  +  1  —  fc,  alternatively  d  ^  A*  —  (2m  + 

1  -  k). 

Second  case:  ac  lies  behind  ap  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows 
along  the  main  channel.  Then  there  is  a  limitation  only  if 
A*  <  2m  +  1  —  k,  in  which  case  d  ^  (2m  +  1  —  k)  —  A*. 

8.6.2  Cyclicity  in  the  coded  channel.  To  conclude  the  discussion  of 
the  coded  channel,  we  come  back  to  the  question  of  cyclicity,  which 
was  briefly  referred  to  early  in  Section  3.6.1. 

The  reason  for  interrupting  the  main  channel  at  p  in  Figure  28g, 
that  is,  for  not  continuing  it  from  p2  to  pi  in  Figures  28h-28k  and 
29,  is  clear.  If  such  a  connection  existed,  i.e.,  if  the  main  channel  were 
a  closed  loop,  then  a  sequence  ivl  •  •  •  ivm  (injected  by  an  av  into  this 
channel)  would  keep  circulating  in  it  forever,  i.e.,  keep  stimulating 
each  bv  periodically.  This  is  not  wanted — we  want  a  stimulus  at  an 
av  to  stimulate  each  bv  precisely  once.  However,  there  are  various 
ways  to  circumvent  this  difficulty.  We  are  giving  in  what  follows  one 
way  that  seems  particularly  simple. 

Consider  Figure  30a,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  Figure  28g,  but 
without  the  interruption  at  p.  We  have  nevertheless  indicated  a  direc- 
tion along  the  main  channel  by  the  arrows,  but  this  is  now  to  be 
viewed  as  cyclical.  We  have  also  put  two  points  p\  ,  p2  on  the  main 
channel,  but  these  are  not  meant  as  interruptions  or  terminations. 
The  unmarked  bars  on  the  main  channel  are  the  av  and  bv ,  as  de- 
scribed in  connection  with  Figures  28f  and  28g-28k.  We  now  proceed 
to  transform  the  structure  indicated  by  Figure  30a  in  the  following 
way. 

In  addition  to  the  n  index  values  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n,  we  introduce  n 
additional  index  values  v  =  l',  •  •  •  ,  n.  We  may  identify  these  with 
n  +  1,  •  •  •  ,  2n,  i.e.,  put  v  =  v  +  n,  but  this  is  not  relevant.  However, 
it  is  relevant  that  n  has  been  replaced  by  2n  {e.g.,  in  condition  (12')} . 

We  now  cut  the  periphery  open  between  pi  and  p2 ,  and  attach  the 
continuations  qx  ,  pi  and  p2 ,  q2  to  the  main  channel  at  these  two 
points,  as  shown  in  Figure  30b.  Along  the  original  main  channel,  i.e., 


DESIGN  OF  SOME  BASIC  ORGANS 




P1P2 ,  we  leave  the  av  unchanged,  but  we  replace  each  bv  by  the  corre- 
sponding bv>  .  This  is  indicated  in  Figure  30b  by  affixing  an  asterisk 
to  each  bar  along  the  original  main  channel,  i.e.,  on  the  portion  pxp2 . 

Next  we  place  outputs  bi  ,  •  •  •  ,  bn  (in  this  order)  on  the  inner  side 
of  P2 ,  #2  (the  one  turned  towards  Pi  ,  qi),  and  the  inputs  av  ,  •  •  •  ,  an>, 
(in  this  order)  on  the  inner  side  of  pi  ,  qi  (the  one  looking  toward 
P2 ,  #2).  We  then  connect  each  bv  (v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n)  directly  to  its  corre- 
sponding av>  .  All  this  refers  to  the  area  in  Figure  30b  that  is  enclosed 
by  dashed  line  and  cross  hatched.  These  arrangements  are  shown  in 
detail  on  Figure  30c,  which  gives  an  enlargement  of  that  area.  Note 
that  the  endings  pi  ,  qi  and  p2 ,  qi  of  the  main  channel  are  moved 
apart  in  Figure  30c  by  as  much  as  needed  to  accommodate  the  outputs 
61  ,  •  •  •  ,  bn  and  the  inputs  av  ,  •  •  •  ,  an>,  that  we  introduced  above 
for  this  region.  More  specifically,  each  av>  means  that  a  P(zV  •  •  •  ivm) 
is  there,  and  each  bv  means  that  a  D(z7  •  •  •  ivn)  is  there.  It  is  for 
these  that  space  (i.e.,  the  necessary  distance  between  pi  ,  qx  and 
P2 ,  #2)  must  be  provided.  The  connection  from  bv  to  av>  ,  shown  in 
Figure  30c,  therefore  follows  the  pattern  shown  in  Figure  29:  the 
output  b"  of  D(zV  •  •  •  ivm)  is  followed  (by  one  square)  by  bv ;  the 
input  av>  of  P(z'J>  •  •  •  i™,)  is  preceded  (by  one  square)  by  av>  .  The 
connection  from  bv  to  av>  is  shown  in  Figure  30c  (by  an  arrow)  as  a 
vertical  channel  (plausibly  of  {ordinary}  transmission  states  io)?  but 
it  suffices  to  make  it  a  direct  contact  of  by  and  av>  .  In  fact,  the  single 
U  borders  of  D(tV  •  •  •  ivm)  between  b"  and  bv  and  of  P(iJ/  •  •  •  i™, ) 
between  av>  and  av>  (cf.  the  analogs  to  this  in  Fig.  29)  can  be  identified 
so  that  bv,f  merges  with  av>  ,  and  bv  with  av>  . 

The  functioning  of  this  organ,  according  to  Figures  30b-30c  is  now 
easily  analyzed.  A  stimulation  at  an  av  (which  must  be  one  of  the 
bars  marked  with  an  asterisk  on  the  portion  pip2  of  Fig.  30b)  can  only 
stimulate  a  bv .  There  exists  precisely  one  bv ,  and  this  lies  ahead  of 
the  av  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main  channel,  namely 
on  the  portion  p2q2 ,  as  detailed  in  Figure  30c.  Hence  the  bv  will  be 
stimulated,  and  from  it  the  stimulus  goes  directly  (along  the  arrow) 
to  av> ,  on  the  portion  qxpi  ,  as  detailed  in  Figure  30c.  Thus  the  av>  is 
stimulated,  which  can  only  stimulate  All  &„>'s  lie  ahead  of  the 
av>  ,  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows  along  the  main  channel,  namely, 
on  the  portion  pxp2  of  Figure  30b,  i.e.,  among  the  bars  marked  with 
asterisks.  To  sum  up,  a  stimulus  at  an  av  (necessarily  at  a  bar  marked 
with  an  asterisk  in  Fig.  30b)  will  stimulate  all  the  bv>  (all  among  the 
bars  marked  with  asterisks  in  Fig.  30b) — irrespective  of  their  positions 
relative  to  each  other  on  the  portion  pip2  of  Figure  30b.  Also,  after 
this  has  taken  place  the  stimulus  will  die,  i.e.,  no  periodic  repetition 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


will  take  place,  since  the  main  channel  of  Figure  30b  is  open  (from 
qi  to  #2 ,  i.e.,  is  not  cyclical).  Thus,  from  the  point  of  view  of  Figure 
30a,  we  have  precisely  the  events  that  were  intended. 

[  This  concludes  von  Neumann's  discussion  of  the  coded  channel.  It 
will  be  recalled  that  he  concluded  his  discussion  of  the  non-cyclic 
coded  channel  (Sec.  3.6.1)  with  rule  (10  ),  which  concerns  corruption 
resulting  from  two  stimuli  entering  the  coded  channel  too  close  to- 
gether. It  is  natural  to  ask  why  he  didn't  state  a  corresponding  rule 
for  the  cyclical  coded  channel  of  Figure  30  (Fig.  27  is  an  example). 
Von  Neumann  gave  no  reason,  but  it  may  be  because  he  later  con- 
structed the  control  organ  for  his  universal  self -reproducing  autom- 
aton with  a  non-cyclic  coded  channel;  see  Figure  37.] 


Chapter  4 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 


4.1  Introduction 

[4.1.1  Abstract.  In  the  present  chapter  von  Neumann  shows  how 
to  embed  an  indefinitely  extendible  tape  and  its  control  in  his  infinite 
cellular  structure. 

The  following  units  are  involved  in  the  tape  and  its  control: 

(1)  A  linear  array  L  for  storing  information:  "zero"  is  represented 
in  cell  xn  by  state  U  and  "one"  is  represented  by  state  io. 

(2)  A  connecting  loop  Q  for  reading  an  arbitrary  cell  xn  . 

(3)  A  timing  loop  C2 ,  used  in  modifying  the  length  of  the  connecting 
loop  Ci  . 

(4)  A  memory  control  MC,  used  to  control  the  operations  of  L.  Ci  . 
and  C2  . 

(5)  The  constructing  unit  CU,  which  controls  MC. 

Except  for  CU,  all  these  units  are  shown  in  Figure  37,  though  not  in 
correct  proportion.  See  also  Figure  50. 

Von  Neumann  describes  these  units  in  a  general  way  in  the  re- 
mainder of  the  present  section.  He  develops  the  detailed  operations 
for  lengthening  and  shortening  loops  Ci  and  C2  and  for  writing  in  cell 
xn  in  Section  4.2.  He  designs  most  of  the  memory  control  MC  in 
Section  4.3;  the  design  will  be  completed  in  Section  5.1. 

Von  Neumann  developed  his  design  in  several  stages,  which  he 
thought  out  as  he  proceeded.  The  final  design  operates  as  follows. 

The  constructing  unit  CU  sends  a  pulse  to  the  memory  control 
MC  signifying  that  cell  xn  is  to  be  read.  This  pulse  causes  the  sequence 
10101  to  enter  the  connecting  loop  Ci  .  The  sequence  10101  then 
enters  cell  xn  with  the  following  effect :  if  xn  is  in  state  U  the  sequence 
1010  changes  it  into  state  10  and  T  returns  to  MC,  while  if  xn  is  in 
state  10  the  whole  sequence  10101  returns  to  MC.  A  T  vs.  10101 
discriminator  ^  detects  the  output  and  informs  the  constructing  unit 
CU  whether  xn  stored  a  "zero"  or  a  "one."  In  either  case  cell  xn  is 
left  in  state  io. 

The  constructing  unit  CU  then  tells  the  memory  control  MC 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


whether  the  loop  Ci  is  to  be  lengthened  so  as  to  pass  through  cell 
xn+i  or  shortened  so  as  to  pass  through  cell  xn-i ,  and  whether  cell  xn 
is  to  be  left  in  state  U  ("zero")  or  10  ("one").  Loop  Ci  is  used  to 
time  the  lengthening  (or  shortening)  of  loop  C2 .  Then  loop  C2  is 
used  to  time  the  lengthening  (or  shortening)  of  loop  Cx  .  The  new 
bit  of  information  is  written  in  cell  xn  while  loop  Ci  is  being  lengthened 
(or  shortened).  At  the  end  of  the  whole  process  the  memory  control 
MC  sends  a  finish  signal  to  the  constructing  unit  CU. 

We  have  indicated  here  only  those  functions  of  the  constructing 
unit  CU  which  concern  the  memory  control  MC.  The  primary  purpose 
of  CU  is  to  carry  out  the  construction  of  a  secondary  automaton 
whose  description  is  stored  in  L.  Thus  the  universal  constructing 
automaton  has  two  parts :  the  constructing  unit  CU,  and  an  arbitrarily 
large  memory  and  its  control  (MC,  L,  Ci ,  and  C2).  See  Section  1.6.1.2 
and  Chapter  5.] 

4.1.®  The  linear  array  L.  We  have  reached  the  point  where  the 
subsidiary  constructions  are  completed  and  our  first  major  synthesis 
can  be  undertaken.  This  highly  composite  organ  that  we  will  now 
construct  has  a  single  purpose,  but  it  will  actually  account  for  approxi- 
mately half  of  the  entire  self -reproducing  organism. 

It  is  best,  therefore,  to  stop  here  for  a  moment  and  make  some 
general  observations  regarding  the  overall  organization  that  is  to  be 
developed. 

We  will  need  an  automaton  that  can  carry  out  general  logical 
functions.  The  specific  way  in  which  this  is  integrated  into  the  effect- 
ing of  self -reproduction  will  be  worked  out  in  detail  later,  but  the 
qualitative  need  for  a  general  logical  automaton  should  be  clear  a 
priori.  These  matters  were  broadly  discussed  in  Chapter  1.  They  were 
first  brought  up  in  the  formulation  of  the  questions  (A)-(E)  in 
Section  1.1.2.1;  their  elaborations  ran  through  Sections  1.2  to  1.7, 
and  they  were  particularly  in  the  foreground  in  Sections  1.4  to  1.6. 
We  will  therefore,  for  the  time  being,  take  the  need  for  a  general 
logical  automaton  for  granted  and  discuss  the  ways  and  means  of 
constructing  one. 

We  noted  in  Sections  1.2.1  and  1.4.2.3  that  a  general  logical  auto- 
maton is  necessarily  organized  around  two  main  parts.  The  first  part 
is  a  network  that  can  carry  out  the  elementary  logical  functions 
(+,  • ,  and  — ;  cf.  the  main  discussion  in  Sec.  1.2.1 ),  and  by  combining 
these  can  evaluate  all  propositional  functions  in  logics  (cf .  the  end  of 
Sec.  1.2.1).  The  second  part  is  an  arbitrarily  large  (finite,  but  freely 
adjustable)  external  memory,  and  the  network  that  is  needed  to 
control  and  to  exploit  that  memory.  We  know  that  the  first  part, 


DESIGN   OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL  203 

the  machine  for  propositional  functions,  can  be  constructed  with 
relatively  simple  means;  indeed,  the  principles  that  are  involved  in 
this  construction  were  in  continuous  use  in  our  past  constructions. 
We  will  take  this  part  up  in  detail  later.  We  turn  our  attention  first 
to  the  second  part,  i.e.,  to  the  arbitrarily  large  external  memory  and 
its  ancillary  network. 

The  arbitrarily  large  external  memory's  physical  embodiment  is 
the  linear  array  L  that  was  discussed  in  Sections  1.4.2.1-1.4.2.4.  We 
saw  there  that  it  was  desirable  to  form  it  from  cells,  each  of  which 
could  be  in  any  one  of  k  preassigned  states.  It  became  clear  in  Section 
1.4.2.1  that  these  states,  in  order  to  be  convenient  for  their  "nota- 
tional"  role,  must  be  quasi-quiescent  states,  i.e.,  states  like  U  or  the 
unexcited  forms  of  transmission  or  confluent  states.  For  a  variety  of 
reasons  it  is  most  practical  to  use  U's  and  ordinary  transmission 
states.  As  indicated  in  Section  1.4.2.4  we  will  use  a  binary  notation; 
i.e.,  we  put  k  =  2.  Accordingly,  we  will  use  the  state  U  and  a  suitable 
ordinary  transmission  state.  The  orientation  of  the  latter  has  to  bear 
a  certain  relation  to  the  orientation  of  the  linear  array  L.  Specifically, 
in  view  of  the  way  in  which  we  will  use  L,  it  is  desirable  that  the 
orientation  of  this  transmission  state  be  transversal  to  the  direction 
of  L.  The  latter  will  be  horizontal.  Accordingly,  it  will  be  found  con- 
venient to  orient  the  transmission  state  vertically  down,  that  is,  to 
use  the  state  io.  (io  represents  in  this  case  the  unexcited  form  of  that 
state,  i.e.,  T030 ;  cf.  Sec.  2.8.2.)  In  order  to  have  a  firm  relationship 
to  the  binary  notation,  we  stipulate  that  U  correspond  to  the  digit  0, 
and  10  to  the  digit  1. 

The  linear  array  L  should  therefore  be  thought  of  as  a  sequence  of 
cells  xn  ,  n  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  ,  which  form  a  continuous  horizontal  line, 
and  for  each  of  which  the  two  states  U,  10  are  available.  With  each 
xn  we  associate  a  numerical  variable  £„  ,  which  designates  the  binary 
digit  represented  by  xn  .  Thus,  £n  =  0  indicates  that  xn  is  U,  £n  =  1 
indicates  that  xn  is  io.  Strictly,  the  length  of  L  should  be  finite;  i.e., 
the  range  of  n  should  terminate,  say  immediately  before  N:  n  =  0, 
1,  •  •  •  ,  N  —  1 .  In  any  case,  it  is  best  to  assume  that  for  sufficiently 
large  n,  £n  =  0.  In  view  of  this,  the  end  of  L  merges  into  the  field  of 
U's  that  we  expect  to  find  outside  the  specifically  constructed  organs. 
It  is  therefore  not  important  in  what  way  L  is  actually  terminated. 

In  order  to  make  this  external  memory  L  useful,  the  ancillary 
networks  referred  to  above  must  be  provided;  that  is,  it  is  necessary  to 
construct  the  means  for  "exploring"  L.  This  "exploration"  includes 
reading  L  at  any  prescribed  place,  and  also  altering  it  in  any  desired 
way  at  any  prescribed  place. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


We  are  therefore  passing  to  the  discussion  of  these  manipulations 
on  L:  reading  and  altering  at  assigned  locations. 

4.1.3  The  constructing  unit  CU  and  the  memory  control  MC.1  Read- 
ing L  at  an  assigned  location,  say  n,  means  to  observe  the  value  of 
£n  .  Altering  it  there  means  to  change  it  from  its  present  value,  (fn  ,  to 
its  next  value,  £n'. 

It  is  convenient  to  use  an  index  8  (s  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  )  to  enumerate 
the  successive  applications  of  this  step.  Hence  the  present  value  of  a 
£n  will  be  designated  by  £n&,  and  its  next  value  by  £n8+1.  Thus  fn*+1 
replaces  the  £n'  that  was  used  above. 

The  n  involved  in  both  operations  (reading  and  altering),  too, 
depends  on  s,  and  this  dependence  must  be  shown  explicitly.  Let 
therefore  ns  be  the  n  used  in  the  above  sense  at  step  number  s. 

The  number  n  may  be  specified  absolutely  or  relatively.  The  latter 
will  prove  to  be  the  preferable  alternative.  By  this  we  mean  the 
following.  It  is  not  convenient — and  if  logical  generality  is  absolutely 
insisted  on,  it  is  not  even  possible — to  limit  the  size  of  n  (or  of  N\ 
cf.  above).  Hence,  the  number  of  binary  digits  of  n  is  not  limited 
either.  Consequently,  n  cannot  be  (or  cannot  be  conveniently)  held 
"inside"  the  logical  automaton,  i.e.,  in  its  first  main  part  according 
to  the  partition  defined  in  Section  4.1.2.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would 
be  very  inconvenient  to  hold  n  in  the  second  main  part,  i.e.,  in  the 
unlimited  "outside"  memory  L.  In  other  words,  it  is  undesirable  at 
this  stage  of  our  automaton  development  (although  we  will  do  it 
later  on,  when  the  integration  of  our  automaton  will  have  progressed 
further)  to  use  L  itself  for  "addressing"  within  L.  These  two  un- 
desirable alternatives  exclude  between  them  the  possibility  of  direct 
addressing,  i.e.,  of  "absolute"  specification  of  n.  The  plausible  proce- 
dure is  therefore  to  use  "relative"  specification  of  n.  That  is,  each 
time  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  specify  n,  we  will  not  do  this 
directly,  but  rather  by  stating  how  the  n  to  be  used  is  related  to  the 
n  used  immediately  before.  It  suffices  to  allow  for  changing  n  at  each 
such  unit  time  step  by  a  single  unit.2  In  other  words,  the  n  to  be 
considered,  n,  will  always  be  related  to  the  one  considered  imme- 
diately before  it,  n5-1,  by 

(17')  ns  =  n8'1  +  es        (es  =  ±1). 

1  [Von  Neumann  did  not  have  titles  for  these  two  units  but  merely  called 
them  "A"  and  "B",  though  the  units  are  not  the  same  as  his  A  and  B  of  Sec. 
1.6.  His  title  for  the  present  subsection  was  "The  detailed  functioning  of  L. 
The  networks  A  and  B.  The  function  of  A  and  its  relationship  to  B."] 

2  Turing,  "On  Computable  Numbers,  With  an  Application  to  the  Ent- 
scheidungsproblem." 


DESIGN  OP  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




The  "relative"  specification  then  consists  of  stating  which  of  its 
two  possible  values  t  assumes,  i.e.,  whether  e  =  1  or  e  =  —1. 

Let  us  now  reconsider  the  two  main  parts  into  which  the  general 
logical  automaton  was  divided  in  Section  4.1.2.  We  can  now  make  this 
division  more  precise  while  reformulating  it  with  some  changes.  The 
first  part  is  the  network  that  carries  out  the  elementary  logical  func- 
tions and  combines  them  to  form  general  logical  propositional  func- 
tions. Let  this  part  be  designated  by  CU.  The  second  part  is  the  ex- 
ternal memory  L,  and  the  network  that  is  needed  to  control  and  to 
exploit  L.  Let  the  latter  be  designated  by  MC.  Thus  the  second  part, 
in  the  sense  of  Section  4.1.2,  is  L  plus  MC.  We  can  now  define  the 
respective  functions  of  CU  and  MC  more  precisely  than  heretofore. 

[Fig.  37  shows  the  relation  of  the  memory  control  MC  to  the  linear 
array  L,  the  connecting  loop  Ci  ,  and  the  timing  loop  C2 .] 

We  know  that  the  function  of  the  memory  control  MC  is  to  read 
and  to  alter  L  at  assigned  locations.  We  saw  above  what  this  involves 
specifically.  Given  e8,  MC  must  replace  n~l  by  n  according  to  equa- 
tion (17');  it  must  sense  the  %sn»  ;  and  given  f£t\  it  must  replace 
£n»  by  i^1.  The  only  portions  of  this  definition  that  require  further 
explanation  are  those  relating  to  the  "given  es  "  and  the  "given 
£nt*  ".  That  is,  we  must  specify  by  what  processes  e  and  ijnt1  are  to 
be  obtained. 

It  is  best  to  attribute  this  function  (the  obtaining  of  e  and 
to  the  constructing  unit  CU.  The  unit  CU  must  form  them  as  a 
function  of  its  own  previous  state,  and  of  the  information  obtained 
in  the  process.  The  latter  is,  of  course,  the  reading  of  %8n«  that  is  per- 
formed by  the  memory  control. 

The  reading  of  £n«  by  MC  occurs  after  the  formation  of  es,  i.e.,  of 
n  {according  to  equation  (17')},  but  before  the  formation  of  It 
must  therefore  affect  the  latter,  but  not  the  former.  However,  it  is 
preferable  to  transpose  these  operations,  i.e.,  to  describe  the  forma- 
tion of  ns+1  from  n\  rather  than  that  of  n  from  n~l.  This  means 
replacing  s  by  s  +  1  in  equation  (17'),  i.e.,  replacing  (17')  by 

(18')  ns+1  =  ns  +  es+1       (esfl  -  ±1). 

Now  we  can  define  the  functioning  of  units  CU  and  MC  as  follows : 
CU  first  gives  a  "start"  pulse  to  MC,  thereby  starting  MC  on  step 
number  s  (if  this  is  the  step  that  has  been  reached  at  this  point ) .  The 
memory  control  MC  then  reads  and  communicates  the  result  of 
this  reading  to  the  constructing  unit  CU.  This  new  information 
changes  the  state  of  CU.  The  unit  CU  thereupon  forms  i^t1  and  es+1 
and  communicates  these  to  MC.  The  unit  MC  now  changes  %sn»  into 


20G 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


i^t1;  then  MC  forms  n+]  according  to  equation  (18')  and  establishes 
the  same  contact  with  ns+1  (i.e.,  with  xn*+i  in  L)  that  it  had  previously 
with  n  (i.e.,  with  xns  in  L).  This  concludes  step  number  s.  The  mem- 
ory control  MC  communicates  this  fact  to  CU.  If  it  is  so  prescribed 
for  the  state  in  which  CU  is  at  that  point,  CU  then  gives  the  next 
"start"  pulse  to  MC,  thereby  starting  MC  on  step  number  s+l, 
etc.,  etc. 

For  the  time  being,  we  wish  to  give  only  a  schematic  description 
of  the  constructing  unit  CU.  It  suffices  therefore  to  say  that  CU, 
being  a  finite  network,  has  only  a  finite  number  of  states,  say  a.  Let 
these  states  be  enumerated  by  an  index  a  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  a.  Let  the  state 
of  CU  at  the  beginning  of  step  number  s  be  a. 

Then  the  relevant  facts  involving  CU  and  its  relationship  to  MC 
are  contained  in  these  specifications: 


(19'.a)  < 


(19\b) 


(19'.c) 


(19'.d) 


If  CU  is  in  the  state  a\  and  MC  communicates  to 
it  a  value      ,  then  CU  goes  over  into  the  state 


s+l       •  v 

a    ,  given  by 


a       =  A  (a,  £n«)« 


If  CU  is  in  the  state  as+1,  then  it  forms  (and 
communicates  to  MC)  the  i^t1  given  by 

&1  =  X(as+1). 

If  CU  is  in  the  state  as+\  then  it  forms  (and 
communicates  to  MC)  the  es+1  given  by 

S+l  77T/ 

e       =  lii  \a  ). 

CU  delivers  the  "start"  pulse  for  step  number  s  to 

MC  if  and  only  if  its  state  a  lies  in  the  subset  $  of  the  a. 


Thus  the  three  functions 
(20'.a) 


A(a,  {)        (a  =  1, 


(20'.b) 
(20'.c) 
and  the  set 
(20'.d)  S 


X(a) 
E(a) 


(a  =  1, 
(a  =  1, 


•  •  ,  a;  %  =  0,  1 ;  values  of  A  = 

a;  values  of  X  =  0,  1 ) , 
a;  values  of  E  =  d=l), 


(subset  of  the  set  of  all  a  =  a), 


contain  the  operational  description  of  CU  and  of  its  relationship  to 
MC,  insofar  as  these  are  relevant  for  our  immediate  purposes.  Later 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




on,  we  will  describe  CU  in  detail,3  but  for  the  present  the  above 
description  suffices.  Our  present  task  is  to  perform  complete  and 
detailed  construction  of  MC,  including  its  connections  with  CU. 

4.1 4  Restatement  of  the  postulates  concerning  the  constructing  unit 
CU  and  the  memory  control  MC.  Let  us  restate  the  postulated  func- 
tioning of  CU  and  MC: 

(1)  CU  and  MC  are  assumed  to  have  reached  the  beginning  of  step 
number  s.  CU  is  in  the  state  a\  MC  is  connected  to  the  cell 
xn*  in  L. 

(2)  If  a  is  not  in  S,  then  CU  will  not  communicate  further  with  MC. 
If  a  is  in  S,  then  CU  gives  a  "start"  pulse  to  MC.  The  "start" 
pulse  initiates  the  events  of  step  number  s. 

(3)  MC  reads  the  state  of  xn*  ,  i.e.,  the  value  of  ££•  ,  and  communi- 
cates this  to  CU. 

(4)  CU  then  forms  as+1  according  to  (19  .a),  and  goes  into  the  state 

«+l 

a 

(5)  CU  then  forms  fjt1  and  €s+1  according  to  (19'.b)  and  (19'.c)  and 
communicates  these  to  MC. 

(6)  MC  changes  xn»  ,  as  required  to  change  £n«  into  £nt\ 

(7)  MC  then  forms  ns+1  =  n  +  es+1  {cf.  equation  (18')}  and  estab- 
lishes its  connection  with  xn»+i  ,  relinquishing  its  connection 
with  xn*  .  That  is,  it  moves  its  connection  within  L  one  square 
forward  if  es+1  =  1,  and  one  square  back  if  es+1  =  —1. 

(8)  Finally,  MC  gives  a  "completion"  signal  to  CU. 

(9)  Now  step  number  s  is  completed  and  step  number  s  +  1  begins. 
The  cycle  therefore  resumes  with  postulate  (1)  above,  etc.,  etc. 

Since  we  wish  to  give  only  a  schematic  description  of  CU  at  this 
stage  (cf.  Sec.  4.1.2),  the  purely  formal  statements  of  postulates 
(1),  (2),  (4),  (5),  concerning  CU  will  suffice  for  the  time  being.  The 
statements  of  postulates  (1),  (2),  (3),  (6),  (7),  (8),  on  the  other 
hand,  concern  MC,  and  our  present  task  is  to  carry  out  an  effective 
and  detailed  construction  of  MC.  Hence  these  last  mentioned  state- 
ments must  be  implemented  by  actual  constructions.  We  will  do  this 
in  Sections  4.1.5-4.1.7,  which  follow. 

4.1.5  The  modus  operandi  of  the  memory  control  MC  on  the  linear 
array  L.  We  must  first  define  the  nature  of  the  "connection"  between 
MC  and  a  specific  cell  xn  in  L,  as  used  in  postulate  (1)  {for  n  =  n] 
and  postulate  (7)  {for  n  =  ns+l]  above.  This  connection  must  be 
such  that  it  makes  the  "reading"  of  xn  by  MC  possible  {cf.  postulate 
(3),  with  n  =  n\,  as  well  as  the  changing  of  xn  by  MC  {cf.  postulate 

3  [Von  Neumann  never  reached  the  part  of  the  manuscript  where  he  planned 
to  design  the  constructing  unit  CU.  See  Chapter  5  below.] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(6)  ,  with  n  =  n).  It  must  also  be  possible  to  move  this  connection, 
operating  from  MC,  one  square  forward  or  backward  {cf.  postulate 

(7)  1. 

The  linear  array  L  is  a  linear  sequence  of  cells  xn  ,  n  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  . 
We  assume  it  to  be  horizontal,  extending,  and  numbered,  from  left 
to  right,  as  shown  in  Figure  31a.  We  assume  furthermore  that  MC 
lies  to  the  left  of  L,  as  shown  in  the  same  figure. 

The  obvious  way  for  reading  cell  xn  {with  n  =  n;  cf.  postulate  (3) 
in  Sec.  4.1.4}  consists  of  having  a  line  of  ordinary  transmission  states 
leading  to  it  from  MC,  and  then  back  from  it  to  MC.  We  place  the 
line  from  MC  to  xn  on  the  upper  side  of  L  and  the  line  from  xn  back 
to  MC  on  the  lower  side  of  L.  Together  with  xn  these  form  a  loop 
from  MC  to  MC,  to  be  called  the  connecting  loop  and  to  be  desig- 
nated Ci  ,  as  shown  in  Figure  31b.  Now  cell  xn  can  be  "read"  by 
sending  a  stimulus  into  the  Ci  loop  at  its  entry  Vi ,  and  observing 
what  emerges  at  its  exit  W\  .  If  xn  is  U  (i.e.,  £ns  =  0)  then  the  stimulus 
will  not  be  able  to  pass  through  xn  (i.e.,  no  response  will  appear  at 
Wi).  If  xn  is  io  (i.e.,  £ns  =  1)  then  the  stimulus  will  pass  through 
xn  (i.e.,  a  response  will  appear  at  W\). 

Note  that  the  stimulus  coming  from  vx  through  Ci  will  nevertheless 
affect  xn  if  it  is  U  (i.e.,  if  £ns  =  0).  It  will  transfer  xn  into  the  sensi- 
tized state  S0  (cf.  Sec.  2.8  for  this  and  for  all  subsequent  discussions 
of  transitions  between  states).  If  nothing  further  happened,  xn  would 
then  go  from  the  state  Se  spontaneously  through  certain  successive 
states,  the  complete  sequence  being 

(21  )        U  — >  S0  — >  So  — ►  Soo  — ►  Sooo  — >  Soooo  =  Tooo  =  ^. 

Now,  it  is  preferable  to  have  xn  terminate  in  the  same  state  in  which 
it  would  have  been  otherwise  (i.e.,  if  £ns  =  1  had  held  instead  of 
%n  =  0),  namely,  the  state  1<>.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  our  sub- 
sequent operations  with  xn  can  be  organized  more  simply  if  they  are 
known  to  start  with  a  fixed  state  of  xn  under  all  conditions.  The 
state  is  T030 ,  i.e.,  Soio .  Hence  the  original  stimulus  (which  trans- 
ferred xn  from  U  into  S  )  should  be  followed  by  the  stimulus-no- 
stimulus  sequence  010.  Hence  a  total  sequence  1010  (at  ^i)  is  called 
for. 

Injecting  1010  at  vx  thus  transforms  xn  ,  in  the  case  £„*  =  0,  succes- 
sively according  to 

(22  )         U  — >  S0  — >  So  — ►  Soi  — ►  Soio  =  To3o  =  1°. 


Since  the  io  appears  at  the  end,  none  of  these  stimuli  is  able  to  pass 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




through  xn  ,  so  no  response  appears  at  W\  .  In  the  case  £na  =  1,  on 
the  other  hand,  xn  is  1<>;  hence  it  is  not  modified,  and  all  stimuli 
pass  through  it,  so  that  the  response  at  wx  is  1010.  To  sum  up,  in- 
jecting 1010  at  Vi  leaves  xn  at  the  end  in  any  case  in  the  state,  !<>  and 
it  produces  at  W\  no  response  or  the  response  1010,  for  %ns  =  0,  1, 
respectively. 

This  procedure  still  has  one  shortcoming:  the  criterion  of  "no 
response  at  Wi  ,"  which  appears  here  as  the  characteristic  of  £ns  =  0, 
is  meaningless  if  it  is  not  known  at  what  time  this  "no  response' '  at 
Wi  is  expected,  since  there  is  equally  no  response  at  wi  at  other  times, 
when  vi  has  not  been  "questioned "  (stimulated).  This  means  that 
the  delay  from  v\  to  Wi  must  be  established  by  other  means.  This  will 
be  needed  for  other  purposes,  too,  and  it  will  be  achieved  with  the 
help  of  the  so-called  timing  loop  (cf.  later).  However,  for  the  present 
purpose  the  desired  result  can  be  secured  more  simply  by  a  direct 
procedure,  and  we  are  therefore  choosing  this  procedure. 

Indeed,  it  suffices  to  add  one  more  stimulus  to  the  input  sequence 
1010  at  Vi  ,  i.e.,  to  use  the  sequence  10101  there.  The  cell  xn  will  be 
in  any  event  in  the  state  lo  before  the  last  stimulus;  hence  this 
stimulus  will  pass,  appear  at  W\  ,  and  still  leave  xn  in  the  state  I©. 
Thus  injecting  10101  at  v\  leaves  xn  at  the  end  in  any  case  in  the  state 
lo,  and  it  produces  at  w\  the  response  1  or  10101  for  £n*  =  0,  1,  re- 
spectively. 

If  the  input  10101  at  vi  is  followed  by  00,  then  for  £ns  =  0  the  I 
at  Wi  is  also  followed  by  00,  and  since  this  1  is  certainly  preceded  by 
0000  (cf.  above),  we  have  for  £ns  =  0  the  sequence  0000100  at  wx  . 
This  sequence  cannot  overlap  with  a  sequence  10101  (which  corre- 
sponds to  &  =  1 ) .  Hence  the  response  at  wx  times  itself  and  discrimi- 
nates unambiguously  between  £„s  =  0  and  £„s  =  1.  The  organ  which 
effects  this  discrimination  is  our  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  (organ 
¥of  Fig.  25). 

Thus  the  problem  of  reading  xn  (with  n  =  n)  is  solved,  and  the 
outline  of  the  construction  of  a  network  to  implement  this  procedure 
is  clear.  (For  the  actual  construction,  cf .  later. ) 

[  The  operation  of  inserting  the  sequence  10101  is  the  first  of  a 
complicated  sequence  of  operations  involving  the  linear  array  L, 
the  connecting  loop  Ci  ,  and  the  timing  loop  C2  .  The  remaining 
operations  are  developed  in  the  balance  of  the  present  section  (4.1) 
and  the  next  section  (4.2),  and  are  summarized  in  Figure  38  of  Sec- 
tion 4.3.2.  See  also  Figure  37. 

When  von  Neumann's  design  is  finished,  the  following  sequence  of 
operations  will  be  used  to  read  from  and  write  in  cell  xn  of  L,  and  to 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  connecting  loop  Ci  and  the  timing  loop  C2 
preparatory  to  reading  cell  xn+i  (or  cell  xn-i): 

(1)  Read  cell  xn  with  the  sequence  10101,  leaving  it  in  state  lo. 

(2)  Lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  timing  loop  C2 ,  using  the  connecting 
loop  Ci  to  time  this  operation. 

(3)  Lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  bottom  of  the  connecting  loop  Ci  , 
using  the  timing  loop  C2  to  time  this  operation. 

(4)  Change  cell  xn  to  U  if  necessary. 

(5)  Lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  top  of  the  connecting  loop  Ci ,  using 
the  timing  loop  C2  to  time  this  operation.] 

4  J  S  The  connecting  loop  Ci .  The  connecting  loop  Ci ,  as  defined 
above,  must  also  handle  the  problem  of  altering  xn  (with  n  =  n;  cf. 
postulate  (6)  in  Sec.  4.1.4),  that  is,  of  transferring  xn  from  that 
state  U,  lo,  which  corresponds  to  £ns  =  0,  1,  respectively,  into  that 
one  which  corresponds  to  £ns+1  =  0,  1,  respectively. 

It  is  natural,  as  well  as  simplest,  to  perform  this  transformation  of 
xn  immediately  after  reading  it  according  to  Section  4.1.5.  However, 
we  will  see  later  that  this  conflicts  with  some  other  desiderata,  and 
we  will  therefore  depart  from  this  arrangement.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
instructive  to  carry  out  a  preliminary  discussion  of  the  altering  of 
xn  based  on  this  assumption,  to  be  corrected  later  on. 

Consider,  accordingly,  the  process  of  altering  Xn  ,  as  if  it  took 
place  immediately  after  the  "reading"  of  xn  .  At  that  moment  xn  is 
certainly  in  the  state  lo  (cf.  above),  which  simplifies  the  task  some- 
what. Indeed,  it  is  now  only  necessary  to  distinguish  between  two 
cases:  £ns  =1,  in  which  case  Xn  is  already  in  the  desired  state  and 
nothing  need  be  done;  £ns+1  =  0,  in  which  case  xn  must  be  transferred 
from  lo  to  U.  (If  xn  had  not  been  altered  from  its  original  form,  there 
would  be  three  distinct  cases,  as  follows.  First,  &  =  £»f+1  {  =  0,  1; 
it  is  irrelevant  which},  and  nothing  need  be  done.  Second,  £n*  =  1, 
£ns+1  =  0,  and  xn  must  be  transferred  from  1©  to  U.  Third,  £ns  =  0, 
£ns+1  =  1,  and  xn  must  be  transferred  from  U  to  lo.) 

Thus  the  only  operational  problem  that  has  to  be  considered  here, 
is  that  of  transferring  xn  from  lo  to  U.  Since  lo  is  an  ordinary  trans- 
mission state,  this  cannot  be  done  with  ordinary  stimuli.  Hence  we 
have  the  problem  of  bringing  special  stimuli  into  the  proper  contact 
with  xn  . 

This  can  be  done  in  the  following  manner.  Let  a  special  transmis- 
sion state  be  in  direct  contact  with  the  first  °*  in  Ci ,  i.e.,  the  one  next 
to  Vi  and  above  xo .  This  can  be  done  by  placing  a  state  1 1  immedi- 
ately above  the  °>  in  question,  i.e.,  at  the  asterisk  in  Figure  31b.  Now 
a  special  stimulus  from  the  asterisk  will  transfer  the  °*  in  question 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




(i.e.,  the  one  above  x0)  into  U.  It  is  desirable  to  transfer  this  further 
into  the  state  i,  which  is  Tioo  (i.e.,  Son).  Hence  the  original,  special 
stimulus  should  be  followed  by  the  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequence 
1011.  These  could  be  ordinary  or  special  stimuli,  since  both  kinds 
have  the  same  effect  on  the  sensitized  states.  It  is  simplest  to  keep 
the  entire  sequence  of  one  kind,  i.e.,  of  special  stimuli  only.  This 
means,  then,  injecting  a  total  sequence  of  special  stimuli  11011  from 
the  asterisk.  Hence  the  square  above  xq  will  be  successively  trans- 
formed according  to 

(23  )  i  — >  U  — >S#  — >  So  — >  Soi  — >  Son  =  Tioo  —  1>- 

Now  the  square  above  xQ  is  a  i.  Hence  a  second  sequence  of  special 
stimuli  11011  injected  from  the  asterisk  will  pass  through  the  i  above 
Xq  as  special  stimuli  and  hit  the  next  °,  i.e.,  the  one  above  Xi  .  It  will 
therefore  put  this  square  through  the  successive  transformations  of 
expression  (23'),  and  in  the  end  leave  it  as  a  i.  Now  the  squares 
above  x0  and  Xi  are  both  in  state  L  Hence  a  third  sequence  of  special 
stimuli  11011  injected  from  the  asterisk  will  pass  through  the  two 
1  above  x0  and  Xi  as  special  stimuli  and  hit  the  next  °,  i.e.,  the  one 
above  x2  .  It  will  therefore  put  this  square  through  the  successive 
transformations  of  expression  (23'),  and  in  the  end  leave  it  in  state 
i.  Now  the  squares  above  xq  ,  X\  ,  and  x2  are  all  in  state  i.  Clearly 
this  process  can  be  continued  at  will.  After  the  injection  of  n  sequences 
of  special  stimuli  11011  from  the  asterisk,  the  n  squares  above  xo , 
Xi  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i  are  all  in  state  i. 

At  this  point  the  procedure  should  be  changed,  since  the  square 
above  xn  must  be  transformed  so  that  it  will  direct  a  special  stimulus 
to  xn  ,  and  not  to  the  next  °  (the  one  above  xn+i).  That  is,  it  should 
become  a  ii,  which  is  Ti3o  (i.e.,  Sno).  Therefore  a  sequence  of  special 
stimuli  11110  should  now  be  injected  from  the  asterisk,  transforming 
the  square  above  xn  according  to 

(24')         i  -*  U  ->  So  -»  Si  ->  Sn  ->  S110  =  T130  =  U. 

Now  we  have  a  continuous  chain  of  special  transmission  states  from 
the  asterisk  to  xn  ;  hence  we  can  transform  xn  .  This  is  a  transforma- 
tion from  lo  to  U,  and  a  single  special  stimulus  delivered  from  the 
asterisk  will  induce  this  transformation. 

Thus  we  need  the  following  system  of  sequences  of  special  stimuli 
injected  from  the  asterisk:  n  sequences  11011,  followed  by  the  se- 
quence 111101  (this  is,  of  course,  11110  and  then  1).  The  subsequent 
condition  of  Cx  and  L  is  shown  in  Figure  31c. 

It  is  not  desirable  to  leave  the  part  of  Ci  that  has  been  so  modified 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(i.e.,  its  upper  line)  in  this  condition.  However,  it  is  easy  to  return 
it  from  its  altered  condition  (in  Fig.  31c)  to  its  original  condition  (in 
Fig.  31b),  leaving  xn  in  its  altered  condition  (which  is  U).  Indeed, 
since  the  upper  line  of  Ci  now  consists  of  special  transmission  states, 
ordinary  stimuli  will  do  this.  These  can  be  injected  at  Vi  .  The  n  first 
squares  (above  xo ,  Xi  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i)  should  be  transformed  from  i  into 
ft,  which  is  Tooo  (i.e.,  Soooo).  Hence  n  sequences  of  ordinary  stimuli 
110000  must  be  injected  at  vx  .  The  first  one  will  transform  the  square 
above  xq  from  i  into  ft,  according  to 

(25  )     1 1  — >  U  — >  S#  — »So  — ►  Soo  — ►  Sooo  — ►  Soooo  —  Tooo  =  1 0  . 

The  second  one  will  do  the  same  to  the  square  above  xx  ,  etc.,  etc., 
and  the  n-th  will  do  the  same  to  the  square  above  zw-i .  The  square 
above  xn  can  now  be  transformed  from  ii  into  |o.  This  is  T03o  (i.e., 
S0io).  Hence  a  sequence  11010  of  ordinary  stimuli  must  be  injected 
at  vi .  This  will  transform  the  square  above  xn  according  to 

(26')      H  ->  U  ->  S9  ->  So  ->  Soi  ->  Soio  =  T03o  =  !<>. 

Thus  we  need  the  following  system  of  sequences  of  ordinary  stimuli 
injected  at  Vi  :  n  sequences  110000,  followed  by  the  sequence  11010. 
The  subsequent  condition  of  Ci  and  L  is  again  that  shown  in  Figure 
31b,  but  with  xn  being  U. 

The  above  discussions  show  that  ordinary  as  well  as  special  stimuli 
must  be  injected  into  Ci .  It  is  desirable  to  control  both  kinds  by 
ordinary  stimuli  from  memory  control  MC.  This  calls  for  no  extra 
arrangements  for  the  ordinary  stimuli  to  Ci  ;  they  can  be  injected 
directly  at  v\  .  However,  further  arrangements  are  needed  for  the 
special  stimuli  to  Q  ,  which  have  to  be  injected  from  the  asterisk 
of  Figures  31b  and  31c.  Thus  there  is  need  for  an  organ  that  converts 
ordinary  stimuli  into  special  stimuli.  We  constructed  such  an  organ 
earlier  for  the  purposes  of  the  periodic  pulser.  It  is  shown  in  Figures 
18g  and  18i.  The  arrangement  of  Figure  18i  is  more  convenient.  Its 
attachment  to  Ci  and  L  is  shown  in  Figure  3 Id.  The  input  to  this 
subsidiary  organ  is  designated  by  U\. 

In  this  way  we  have  a  system  where  the  original  stimulations  are 
uniformly  made  by  ordinary  pulses  either  at  ux  or  at  Vi  .  The  former 
cause  the  injection  of  special  pulses  into  Ci  ;  the  latter  inject  directly 
ordinary  pulses  into  Ci — in  both  cases  into  the  square  above  cell  x0 . 

We  can  now  give  the  final  form  of  the  description  of  the  treatment 
that  transfers  xn  from  U  into  i  o,  and  leaves  everything  else  in  Ci  and 
L  in  its  previous  condition: 
(27  .a)  Inject  n  sequences  11011  at  U\  . 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




(27'. b)  Inject  a  sequence  111101  at  ux  . 

(27'. c)  Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  vx  . 

(27'.d)  Inject  a  sequence  11010  at  Vi  . 

Jf.1.7  The  timing  loop  C2  .  The  scheme  of  the  previous  subsection, 
as  summarized  in  rules  (27  .a-27  .d)  is  still  incomplete  in  one  respect. 
Rules  (27'. a)  and  (27'. c)  call  for  the  n-fold  repetition  of  certain 
operations,  injecting  11011  and  110000  at  Ui  and  Vi  ,  respectively. 
This  can  be  done  with  the  periodic  pulsers  PP(llOll)  and 
PP  (110000),  but  these  must  then  be  turned  off  with  the  delays  5n 
and  6n,  respectively,  after  they  have  been  turned  on.  How  are  these 
delays  to  be  ascertained  ? 

Prima  facie  there  would  seem  to  be  the  same  difficulty,  connected 
with  the  size  of  n,  and  its  consequent  unsuitability  for  storage  "in- 
side" MC,  which  we  observed  at  the  beginning  of  Section  4.1.3. 
This  difficulty  can  be  overcome  by  essentially  the  same  device:  rela- 
tive instead  of  absolute  definition  of  n.  However,  it  is  impractical 
to  sense  n,  with  our  present  arrangements,  on  L  itself.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  to  introduce  a  second  "outside"  organ  to  store  n — or 
rather  to  express  it  in  so  explicit  a  manner  that  its  sensing  for  the 
above  purposes  becomes  immediately  feasible.  The  best  way  to  do 
this  seems  to  be  the  introduction  of  another  loop  from  MC  to  MC, 
whose  length  each  way  is  n,  or  n  plus  a  fixed  amount.  That  is,  we 
assume  that  there  is,  at  a  suitable  distance  below  L  and  parallel  to 
it,  a  sequence  of  n  ordinary  transmission  states  °  leading  out  from 
MC,  this  sequence  being  terminated  by  an  ordinary  transmission 
state  1  o,  and  immediately  under  this  another  line  of  n  +  1  ordinary 
transmission  states  1  leading  back  to  MC.  We  position  these  below 
the  squares  x0 ,  Xi ,  •  •  •  ,  xn  of  L.  This  will  be  called  the  timing  loop 
and  designated  C2 ,  as  shown  in  Figure  31e.  Clearly  a  stimulus  injected 
into  the  timing  loop  at  its  input  v2  will  reappear  at  its  output  w2  with 
a  delay  of  2n  +  2.  It  will  appear  later  on  that  it  is  desirable  to  pro- 
vide C2  with  the  same  additional  facilities  for  the  injection  of  special 
stimuli,  as  were  provided  for  Ci .  Hence  we  place  again  the  equivalent 
of  Figure  18i  above  the  t  under  Xq  ,  and  designate  its  input  by  u2 . 
This  arrangement  defines  the  distance  from  Ci  to  C2  and  the  position 
of  both  relatively  to  MC,  as  shown  in  Figure  31f. 

Since  the  delay  from  v2  to  w2  is  2n  +  2,  the  delay  three  times  around 
this  loop  is  6n  +  6.  This  differs  from  the  delay  6n,  required  in  con- 
nection with  operation  (27'. c)  of  Section  4.1.6  by  6,  which  is  a  fixed 
amount  (i.e.,  independent  of  n).  Hence  it  can  be  used  to  define  the 
delay  called  for  in  connection  with  operation  (27'.c),  subject  only 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


to  the  insertion  of  suitable  fixed  delays,  which  is  feasible  "inside" 
MC. 

The  delay  required  in  connection  with  operation  (27'. a)  of  Section 
4.1.6  is  5n,  and  no  integer  multiple  of  2n  +  2  differs  from  this  by  a 
fixed  amount  (i.e.,  by  one  that  is  independent  of  n).  This  difficulty 
can  be  circumvented  by  adding  a  0  (i.e.,  a  "no  stimulus")  to  the 
sequence  11011  in  operation  (27  .a).  This  gives  the  sequence  110110; 
i.e.,  it  replaces  operation  (27  .a)  as  follows: 

(27'. a')  Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  u\  . 

Now  operation  (27'.a'),  too,  requires  a  delay  6n;  i.e.,  it  can  be  treated 
precisely  like  operation  (27  .c). 

The  sensing  of  three  trips  around  the  timing  loop  can  be  effected 
with  the  triple-return  counter.  This  organ  <£  is  shown  in  Figure  23. 
Its  output  d  must  then  be  attached  to  v2  and  its  input  c  to  w2 .  Let 
the  delay  from  d  to  v2  be  b2  and  the  delay  from  w2  to  c  be  b2  .  In  the 
terminology  of  Section  3.4,  then,  12  is  the  line  from  d  to  v2 ,  plus  C2 
from  v2  to  w2 ,  plus  the  line  from  w2  to  c.  Hence  the  delay  from  c 
through  12  to  d  is  b2  +  (2n  +  2)  +  b2  .  Consequently,  according  to 
the  end  of  Section  3.4  and  Figure  24d,  the  delay  from  a  through  <i> 
(and  12)  to  b  is  238  +  3(6/  +  (2n  +  2)  +  b2  )  =  6n  +  (3(S2'  + 
b2)  +  244).  This  exceeds  the  delay  6n,  called  for  in  connection  with 
rules  (27\a)  and  (27'.c),  by  3(S2'  +  b2)  +  244,  which  is  a  fixed 
amount  (i.e.,  independent  of  n).  Hence  this  can  be  adjusted  for  by 
suitable  fixed  delays  that  can  be  provided  "inside"  the  memory 
control  MC. 

4.2  Lengthening  and  Shortening  Loops  Ci  and  C2  , 
and  Writing  in  the  Linear  Array  L 

4.2.1  Moving  the  connection  on  L.  There  remains  one  more  problem 
for  our  preliminary  consideration:  that  of  moving  the  connection  of 
MC  with  L  one  square  forward  or  backward  (cf.  postulate  (7)  in 
Sec.  4.1.4). 

This  means  lengthening  or  shortening  both  lines  of  the  connecting 
loop  Ci  by  one  square.  Now  we  saw  in  Section  4.1.6  that  the  timing 
loop  C2  is  expected  to  have  the  same  length  as  the  connecting  loop 
Ci  .  Hence  both  lines  of  C2 ,  too,  must  be  lengthened  or  shortened 
by  one  square. 

It  is  desirable  to  perform  these  operations  at  a  time  when  Ci  forms 
an  uninterrupted  loop,  from  Vi  to  wi  .  (The  loop  C2  is  normally  un- 
interrupted from  v2  to  w2.)  This  is  the  case  when  xn  is  in  state  I». 
We  saw  at  the  end  of  Section  4.1.5  and  the  beginning  of  Section  4.1.6 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




that  this  can  be  guaranteed  during  the  period  between  the  reading 
and  the  altering  of  xn  •  (The  reading  necessarily  precedes  the  alter- 
ing. )  We  will  therefore  perform  the  operations  in  question  (lengthen- 
ing or  shortening  each  line  of  Ci  and  of  C2  by  one  square)  during  this 
period. 

Beyond  this  point  the  two  alternatives  (es+1  =  1,  lengthening,  and 
es+1  =  —1,  shortening)  are  better  considered  separately. 

[  The  general  process  to  be  carried  out  is  that  of  altering  the  loops 
Ci  and  C2  at  their  ends,  and  perhaps  modifying  the  contents  of  the 
storage  cell  xn  .  The  procedure  for  doing  this  was  illustrated  in  Figure 
14  of  Section  2.8.3.  The  construction  path  is  changed  back  and  forth 
between  a  path  of  ordinary  transmission  states  and  a  path  of  special 
transmission  states.  A  path  of  ordinary  transmission  states  is  con- 
verted into  a  path  of  special  transmission  states  by  means  of  special 
stimuli,  and  a  path  of  special  transmission  states  is  converted  into  a 
path  of  ordinary  transmission  states  by  means  of  ordinary  stimuli. 

The  following  inputs  are  used :  ux  and  vx  for  Q  ,  and  and  v2  for 
C2 .  See  Figures  31-37  and  39.  A  sequence  of  ordinary  stimuli  into 
Ui  changes  the  upper  part  of  Ci  into  a  path  of  special  transmission 
states,  and  a  sequence  of  ordinary  stimuli  into  V\  changes  the  upper 
part  of  Ci  back  into  a  path  of  ordinary  transmission  states.  Similarly 
for  u2 ,  v2 ,  and  C2  . 

The  conversion  of  a  cell  from  an  ordinary  transmission  state  to  a 
special  transmission  state  (or  vice- versa)  takes  six  stimuli  in  the 
worst  case  (see  Fig.  10).  Hence  to  change  the  path  from  vi  to  xn 
from  ordinary  to  special  states  (or  vice-versa)  requires  approximately 
6n  pulses.  Now  n  is  an  arbitrary  finite  number,  and  hence  cannot 
be  stored  in  the  finite  automaton  MC  (or  the  finite  automaton  CU). 
Von  Neumann  ingeniously  solved  this  problem  by  introducing  the 
timing  loop  C2 . 

The  timing  loop  C2  is  attached  to  a  triple-return  counter  <£2  ;  see 
Figure  39.  In  the  terminology  of  Section  3.4,  the  loop  C2  is  the  re- 
sponding organ  £2  of  the  triple-return  counter  <J>2  .  Three  times  the 
delay  around  loop  C2  is  approximately  the  variable  part  of  the  needed 
delay  6n.  The  desired  sequence  of  pulses  into  ux  or  V\  is  obtained  from 
periodic  pulsers  PP(iWi4i5i6)  turned  on  for  approximately  this 
period  6n.  Similarly,  the  triple-return  counter  <£i  of  Figure  39  and 
the  loop  Ci  are  used  to  time  the  sequence  of  pulses  needed  to  modify 
loop  C2 .  Finite  sequences  of  pulses  are  needed  for  changing  the  ends 
of  Ci  and  C2  and  writing  in  cell  xn  ;  these  are  easily  obtained  from 
pulsers. 

Before  the  lengthening  (or  shortening)  process  begins,  cell  xn  has 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


been  read  by  means  of  a  sequence  10101  and  has  been  left  in  the  state 
io  (see  Sec.  4.1.5).  When  von  Neumann  has  finished  his  design  the 
following  sequence  of  operations  will  be  used  to  lengthen  (or  shorten) 
the  loops  Ci  and  C2  and  write  in  cell  xn  : 

(1)  Lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  timing  loop  C2  by  means  of  periodic 
pulsers  and  pulsers  feeding  into  inputs  u2  and  v2 .  The  length  of 
time  each  periodic  pulser  is  on  is  controlled  by  the  triple-return 
counter  <f>i  to  which  loop  Ci  is  attached  as  its  responding  organ  12. 

(2)  Make  the  following  modifications  in  loop  Q  and  cell  xn  : 

(a)  Lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  bottom  of  loop  Ci,  gaining  access 
to  it  through  cell  xn  so  as  not  to  disturb  cells  xn-i  or  xn+i  . 

(b)  Leave  cell  xn  in  state  U  if  a  "zero"  is  to  be  stored;  leave  cell 
xn  in  state  i«  if  a  "one"  is  to  be  stored. 

(c)  Lengthen  (or  shorten)  the  top  of  loop  d  . 

The  stimuli  required  for  this  process  are  fed  into  inputs  Ui  and 
Vi  from  periodic  pulsers  and  plain  pulsers.  The  length  of  time 
each  periodic  pulser  is  left  on  is  controlled  by  the  triple-return 
counter  $2  to  which  the  loop  C2  is  now  attached  as  its  responding 
organ  12. 

At  the  end  of  these  two  steps  cell  xn  is  left  in  the  desired  state,  the 
connecting  loop  Ci  passes  through  cell  xn+i  on  the  lengthening  option 
and  through  cell  xn-i  on  the  shortening  option,  and  the  timing  loop 
C2  is  of  the  same  length  as  loop  Ci  . 

In  Sections  4.2.2-4.2.4  von  Neumann  derived  31  formulas  de- 
scribing the  sequences  to  be  fed  into  loops  Ci  and  C2  to  accomplish 
the  purpose  just  described.  These  formulas  are  all  summarized  in 
Table  II  on  p.  235  below.  They  are  numbered  28'. a  through  3l'.h  in 
Sections  4.2.2-4.2.4  and  renumbered  0.1  through  0.31  in  Table  II. 

Table  III  on  p.  236  below  summarizes  the  periodic  pulsers  needed 
to  produce  sequences  repeated  approximately  n  times  and  the  excess 
delays  involved  in  timing  these  periodic  pulsers  by  means  of  the 
triple -return  counters  $i  and  <£2  and  the  loops  Ci  and  C2  . 

Table  IV  on  p.  237  below  summarizes  the  pulsers  needed  to  produce 
the  fixed  sequences  called  for  by  the  formulas. 

The  reader  may  find  it  helpful  to  refer  to  Tables  II-IV  while  read- 
ing the  rest  of  the  present  section.] 

4.2.2  Lengthening  on  L.  Consider  first  the  case  es+1  =  1  (lengthen- 
ing). In  performing  this  operation,  n  (orn  +  1)  ordinary  transmis- 
sion states  (i  on  the  upper  lines  of  Ci  and  C2  ,  J?  on  the  lower  lines 
of  Ci  and  C2)  must  be  transformed  repeatedly  into  the  corresponding 
special  transmission  states  (_i,  J:,  respectively),  and  conversely.  This 
requires  arrangements  like  (27'. a')  and  (27  .c)  (for  the  — *  class), 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




and  others  similar  to  these  (for  the  <—  class);  hence  there  exists  again 
the  necessity  of  measuring  delays  6ft  (or  6ft  plus  a  fixed  amount) 
between  the  turning  on  and  off  of  the  periodic  pulsers  that  are  used. 
While  loop  Ci  is  being  worked  on,  these  delay  measurements  can  be 
effected  with  the  help  of  loop  C2  (and  the  triple-return  counter, 
together  with  suitable  fixed  delays;  cf.  Sec.  4.1.7).  While  loop  C2 
is  being  worked  on,  it  is  plausible  to  use  loop  Ci  for  the  same  purpose 
(with  similar  auxiliary  equipment).  This  is  a  reason  why  Ci  should 
at  this  time  form  an  uninterrupted  loop  (from  MC  to  MC),  i.e., 
why  cell  xn  should  be  in  state  1©  (cf.  above).  We  know  that  this 
condition  is  satisfied  when  our  present  procedure  begins;  hence  the 
operations  on  loop  C2  should  be  the  first  ones  that  are  undertaken 
(before  those  on  loop  Q ) . 

Thus  our  first  task  is  to  lengthen  both  lines  of  loop  C2  by  one  square. 
This  is  best  begun  by  transforming  the  entire  upper  line  of  C2  (the 
squares  of  C2  under  Xq  ,  X\ ,  •  •  •  ,  xn — their  number  is  n  +  1 )  into 
i,  i.e.,  from  its  original  condition  in  Figure  32a  into  that  of  Figure 
32b.  Since  these  squares  are  originally  °,  i.e.,  ordinary  states,  special 
stimuli  are  required.  We  saw  in  Section  4.1.6  {cf.  the  discussion  of 
operation  (23')}  that  each  transformation  requires  the  stimulus-no- 
stimulus  sequence  11011,  or,  according  to  Section  4.1.7  {cf.  the  passage 
from  operation  (27'. a)  to  operation  (27'. a')},  the  stimulus-no-stimu- 
lus sequence  110110.  Hence  we  have  this  requirement: 

(28'. a)  Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110110  at  u2 . 

Note  that  this  calls  for  a  PP (110110),  with  a  delay  6ft  +  6  between 
turning  on  and  off.  It  is  appropriate  to  attach  a  triple-return  counter 
<£  (cf.  Fig.  24)  to  loop  Ci ,  since  the  latter  is  now  being  used  for  tim- 
ing. Hence  we  attach  the  output  d  of  <£  to  V\  and  the  input  c  of  3>  to 
Wi  .  Let  the  delay  from  d  to  Vi  be  5/,  and  the  delay  from  w\  to  c  be 
Si".  The  delay  from  Vi  through  loop  Ci  to  Wi  is  2n  +  3.  In  the  termi- 
nology of  Section  3.4,  Q,  is  the  path  from  d  to  vx  ,  plus  Ci  from  vi  to 
Wi  ,  plus  the  path  from  w\  to  c.  Hence  the  delay  from  d  through  12 
to  c  is  S/  +  (2n  +  3)  +  5i".  Consequently,  according  to  the  end  of 
Section  3.4  and  Figure  24  the  delay  from  a  through  $  (and  12)  to  b  is 
238  +  3(5/  +  (2n  +  3)  +  5/')  =  6ft  +  (3(5/  +  5/')  +  247).  This 
exceeds  the  delay  6ft  +  6,  called  for  in  connection  with  rule  (28  .a), 
by  3(5/  +  5/  )  +  241,  which  is  a  fixed  amount  (i.e.,  independent  of 
ft).  Hence  this  can  be  adjusted  by  suitable  fixed  delays,  that  can  be 
provided  "inside"  MC. 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  i  (which  is 
U)  into  li,  and  the  square  under  this  (which  is  also  U)  into  Z-]  i.e., 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


we  go  from  Figure  32b  to  Figure  32c.  The  state  li  is  Ti30  (i.e.,  Sn0) 
and  the  state  1  is  T020  (i.e.,  S001).  Hence  the  sequences  1110  and  1001 
of  special  stimuli  are  needed,  i.e. : 

(28'.b)  Inject  the  sequence  11101001  at  u2 . 

Now  the  lower  line  of  the  timing  loop  C2  is  in  its  desired  condition, 
and  there  remains  the  task  of  dealing  with  the  upper  line.  This  begins 
by  transforming  all  of  it,  except  its  last  square  (i.e.,  the  squares  under 
£0 ,  Xi  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn — their  number  is  n  +  1 )  into  state  t.  This  loop  C2  is 
transformed  from  its  condition  in  Figure  32c  into  that  of  Figure  32d. 
Since  the  cells  to  be  changed  are  in  state  ordinary  stimuli  are  re- 
quired. We  saw  in  Section  4.1.6  {cf.  the  discussion  of  operation  (25')} 
that  each  transformation  requires  the  stimulus-no-stimulus  sequence 
110000.  Hence  we  have  this  requirement: 

(28'.c)  Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110000  at  v2  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP  (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  +  6  between  turning 
on  and  off.  The  same  triple-return  counter  <i>,  attached  to  Ci ,  that  we 
used  in  connection  with  operation  (28'.a),  can  take  care  of  this  delay 
too.  The  details  are  the  same  as  in  the  discussion  after  operation 
(28'. a);  i.e.,  the  delay  from  a  to  b  {cf.  that  discussion  and  Fig.  24} 
exceeds  the  desired  delay  by  3(5/  +  6/')  +  241,  which,  being  fixed, 
calls  for  adjustments  that  can  be  provided  "inside"  MC. 

Finally,  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  t,  (which 
is  li)  into  i<>;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  32d  to  Figure  32e.  The  state  1<> 
is  T030  (i.e.,  S010).  Hence  the  sequence  11010  of  ordinary  stimuli  is 
needed : 

(28'.d)  Inject  the  sequence  11010  at  v2 . 

This  completes  the  lengthening  of  the  timing  loop  C2 .  We  must  now 
perform  the  corresponding  operation  on  the  connecting  loop  Ci  . 

The  state  of  loop  Ci  is  shown  in  Figure  33a.  It  is  best  to  begin  the 
lengthening  operation  on  the  lower  line  of  Q  ,  the  access  to  it  being 
obtained  through  the  upper  line  of  Ci  and  the  state  1 0  at  the  place  of 
xn  .  We  transform  accordingly  the  entire  upper  line,  except  its  last 
square  (the  squares  above  Xo ,  X\ ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-r — their  number  is  n) 
into  L.  That  is,  we  transform  the  upper  line  of  Ci  from  its  condition 
in  Figure  33a  into  that  of  Figure  33b.  Since  these  squares  are  i  (i.e., 
ordinary  states),  special  stimuli  are  required.  Just  as  for  operation 
(27'. a')  {or  operation  (28'.a)},  each  transformation  requires  the 
sequence  110110.  Hence: 

(29'. a)  Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  ux . 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




This  calls  for  a  PP(llOllO),  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  The  timing  can  be  achieved  with  a  triple-return 
counter  tied  to  Vz ,  w2  (with  its  d,  c,  respectively),  precisely  as  in  the 
discussion  after  operation  (27'.a').  However,  the  length  of  C2  is 
now  1  unit  greater  than  it  was  there;  hence  the  delay  through  C2 
is  increased  by  2,  and  the  delay  3  times  through  C2  is  increased  by  6. 
Hence  the  fixed  excess  delay,  which  must  be  compensated  by  adjust- 
ments "inside"  the  memory  control  MC,  is  increased  by  6;  i.e.,  it 
is  now  3  (5/  +  52")  +  250. 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  i.  (which  is 
lo)  into  li,  the  square  under  this  (which  is  also  lo)  also  into  H, 
the  square  under  this  (which  is  1)  into  i  (these  three  are  the  square 
above,  at,  and  under  the  place  of  xn),  and  the  square  to  the  right  of 
this  (which  is  U)  into  l_;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  33b  to  Figure  33c. 
The  state  li  is  Ti30  (i.e.,  Suo),  I  is  Ti00  (i.e.,  Son),  1  is  T020  (i.e., 
Sooi).  Hence  the  sequences  11110,  11110,  11011,  1001  of  special 
stimuli  are  needed,  i.e.: 


Now  we  may  restore  the  squares  at  and  below  the  place  of  xn  to 
their  final  condition.  We  must  again  get  in  through  the  upper  line. 
Hence  we  transform  all  of  it,  except  its  last  square  (the  squares  above 
Xq  ,  Xi ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i — their  number  is  n)  into  °;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure 
33c  to  Figure  33d.  Since  the  affected  part  of  the  upper  line  now  con- 
sists of  special  transmission  states,  ordinary  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just 
as  for  operation  (27'.c),  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence 


This  calls  for  a  PP  (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrangements 
used  for  operation  (29'. a). 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  i  (which  is 
1 1 )  into  1  o,  the  square  under  this  (which  is  also  I  i )  into  i  o,  and  the 
square  under  this  (which  is  i)  into  J_  (these  three  are  the  squares 
above,  at,  and  under  the  place  of  xn);  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  33d  to 
Figure  33e.  The  state  |o  is  T03o  (i.e.,  Soio),  1  is  T020  (i.e.,  Sooi).  Hence 
the  sequences  11010,  11010,  11001  of  ordinary  stimuli  are  needed, 
i.e.: 


110000,  i.e.: 
(29'.c) 


Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  Vi  . 


(29'.d)     Inject  the  sequence  110101101011001   at  vx  . 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Now  we  can  carry  out  the  lengthening  of  the  upper  line  of  Ci  .  We 
begin  by  transforming  the  entire  upper  line  (the  squares  above  xo , 
x\  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn — their  number  is  n  +  1)  into  i;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure 
33e  to  Figure  33f.  Since  the  upper  line  now  consists  of  ordinary  trans- 
mission states,  special  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just  as  for  operation 
(29'. a),  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence  110110,  i.e.: 

(29\ e)  Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110110  at  ux . 

This  calls  for  a  PP(llOllO),  with  a  delay  6n  +  6  between  turning 
on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments used  for  operation  (29  .a),  except  that  the  delay  to  be  timed 
is  now  longer  by  6.  Hence  the  fixed  excess  delay,  which  must  be 
compensated  by  adjustments  "inside"  the  memory  control  MC,  is 
decreased  by  6;  i.e.,  it  is  now  3  (82  +  82  )  +  244. 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  !  (which  is 
U)  into  10;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  33f  to  Figure  33g.  The  state  l«  is 
T030  (i.e.,  S010).  Hence  the  sequence  1010  of  special  stimuli  is  needed, 
i.e.: 

(29'. f)  Inject  the  sequence  1010  at  ux  . 

Finally  we  transform  the  balance  of  the  upper  line  (the  squares 
above  xq  ,  Xi ,  •  •  •  ,  xn — their  number  is  n  +  1)  into  °>;  i.e.,  we  go 
from  Figure  33g  to  Figure  33h.  Since  the  affected  part  of  the  upper 
line  now  consists  of  special  transmission  states,  ordinary  stimuli  will 
do  this.  Just  as  for  operation  (27'.c),  each  transformation  requires 
the  sequence  110000,  i.e.: 

(29'.g)  Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110000  at  vx  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP  (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  +  6  between  turning 
on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments used  for  operation  (29  .e). 

This  completes  the  lengthening  of  the  connecting  loop  Q  ,  i.e., 
the  entire  first  case,  es+1  =  1. 

4.2.3  Shortening  on  L.  Consider  now  the  case  es+1  =  —  1  (shorten- 
ing). The  treatment  runs,  in  its  main  outline,  parallel  to  that  of  the 
first  case.  Hence  the  operations  on  C2  should  again  be  undertaken 
first  (before  those  on  Ci). 

Thus  our  first  task  is  to  shorten  both  lines  of  C2  by  one  square. 
This  is  best  begun  by  transforming  the  entire  upper  line  of  C2 ,  except 
its  last  square  (i.e.,  the  squares  under  xo ,  Xi  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i — their  num- 
ber is  n)  into  i.e.,  from  its  original  condition  in  Figure  32a  into 
that  of  Figure  34a.  Since  these  squares  are  originally  t  (i.e.,  ordinary 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




states),  special  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just  as  for  transformation  (29'.a), 
each  transformation  requires  the  sequence  110110,  i.e.: 

(30'.a)  Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  u2 . 

This  calls  for  a  PP(llOllO),  with  a  delay  6n  between  the  turning 
on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments that  take  care  of  operation  (28  .a),  except  that  the  delay  to 
be  timed  is  now  shorter  by  6.  Hence  the  fixed  excess  delay,  which 
must  be  compensated  by  adjustments  "inside"  the  memory  control 
MC,  is  increased  by  6;  i.e.,  it  is  now  3(5/  +  O  +  247. 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  i  (which  is 
lo)  into  |i,  and  the  square  under  this  (which  is  1)  into  U;  i.e.,  we  go 
from  Figure  34a  to  Figure  34b.  The  state  U  is  Ti30  (i.e.,  Sn0).  Hence 
the  sequences  11110  and  1  of  special  stimuli  are  needed,  i.e.: 

(30'.b)  Inject  the  sequence  111101  at  u2 . 

Now  we  restore  the  upper  line  of  C2 ,  except  its  last  square  (i.e., 
the  squares  under  x0 ,  X\  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i — their  number  is  n)  into  °;  i.e., 
we  go  from  Figure  34b  to  Figure  34c.  Since  these  squares  are  now 
special  transmission  states,  ordinary  stimuli  will  do  this  just  as  for 
operation  (27'.c).  Hence  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence 
110000,  i.e.: 

(30'.c)  Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  v2 . 

This  calls  for  a  PP (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  with  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments that  take  care  of  operation  (30  .a). 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  t  (which  is 
i  1)  into  U;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  34c  to  Figure  34d.  For  this  a  single 
ordinary  stimulus  is  needed,  i.e. : 

(30'.d)  Inject  a  single  stimulus  at  v2 . 

At  this  point  the  shortening  of  C2  is  effected,  since  the  two  right- 
most squares  have  been  transformed  into  U's,  but  the  rightmost 
square  of  what  is  left  of  the  upper  line  (the  one  under  av-i)  is  not  in 
the  desired  state  (it  is  °  instead  of  lo).  We  go  on  to  correct  this. 

We  transform  the  upper  line,  except  its  last  square  (the  squares 
under  — their  number  is  n  —  1)  into  i;  i.e.,  we  go 
from  Figure  34d  to  Figure  34e.  Since  these  squares  are  now  ordinary 
transmission  states,  special  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just  as  for  operation 
(29'. a),  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence  110110,  i.e.: 

(30'.e)  Inject  n  —  1  sequences  110110  at  u2 . 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


This  calls  for  a  PP(IlOllO),  with  a  delay  On  —  (>  between  turning 
on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments that  take  care  of  operation  (30'.a),  except  that  the  delay  to 
be  timed  is  now  shorter  by  6.  Hence  the  fixed  excess  delay,  which 
must  be  compensated  by  adjustments  "inside"  MC,  is  increased  by 
6;  i.e.,  it  is  now  3(5/  +  Si")  +  253. 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  L  (which  is 
°)  into  1»;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  34e  to  Figure  34f.  The  state  lo  is 
Toso  (i.e.,  Soio).  Hence  the  sequence  11010  of  special  stimuli  is  needed, 
i.e.: 

(30'.f)  Inject  the  sequence  11010  at  u2  . 

Finally  we  transform  the  balance  of  the  upper  line  (the  squares 
under  Xq  ,  X\ ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-2 — their  number  is  n  —  1)  into  °>;  i.e.,  we  go 
from  Figure  34f  to  Figure  34g.  Since  the  affected  part  of  the  upper 
line  consists  now  of  special  transmission  states,  ordinary  stimuli  will 
do  this.  Just  as  for  operation  (27'. c),  each  transformation  requires 
the  sequence  110000,  i.e.: 

(30'.g)  Inject  n  —  1  sequences  110000  at  v2  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP  (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  —  6  between  turning 
on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments that  take  care  of  operation  (30  .e). 

This  completes  the  shortening  of  C2  .  We  must  now  perform  the 
corresponding  operation  on  Ci  . 

The  state  of  Q  is  shown  in  Figure  33a.  It  is  best  to  begin  the  short- 
ening operation  (just  as  we  did  the  lengthening  operation)  on  the 
lower  line  of  Ci  ,  the  access  to  it  being  obtained  through  the  upper 
line  of  Q  and  the  1<>  at  the  place  of  xn  .  We  transform  accordingly 
first  the  entire  upper  line,  except  its  last  square  (the  squares  above 
Xq  ,  Xi ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i — their  number  is  n)  into  i;  i.e.,  from  its  condition 
in  Figure  33a  into  that  in  Figure  35a.  Since  these  squares  are  °  (i.e., 
ordinary  states),  special  stimuli  are  required.  Just  as  for  operation 
(29'. a),  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence  110110,  i.e.: 

(3l'.a)  Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  %h  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP (110110),  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  The  timing  can  be  achieved  with  the  same  means  that 
were  used  after  operation  (29'.a).  However,  the  length  of  C2  is  now  2 
less  than  it  was  there;  hence  the  delay  through  C2  is  decreased  by  4 
and  the  delay  three  times  through  C2  is  decreased  by  12.  Therefore, 
the  fixed  excess  delay,  which  must  be  compensated  by  adjustments 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




"inside"  the  memory  control  MC,  is  decreased  by  12;  i.e.,  it  is  3  (S2'  + 
52")  +  238. 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  i  (which  is 

10)  into  li,  the  square  under  this  (which  is  also  io)  into  U,  and  the 
square  under  this  (which  is  1)  into  U  (these  three  are  the  squares 
above,  at,  and  under  the  place  of  xn);  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  35a  to 
Figure  35b.  The  state  li  is  Ti3o  (i.e.,  Sno).  Hence  the  sequences 
11110,  11110, 1  of  special  stimuli  are  needed,  i.e.: 

(3l'.b)  Inject  the  sequence  11110111101  at  u\  . 

Now  we  may  restore  the  square  at  the  place  of  xn  to  its  final  con- 
dition. We  must  again  get  in  through  the  upper  line.  Hence  we  trans- 
form first  all  of  it,  except  its  last  square  (the  squares  above  xo , 
Xi ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i — their  number  is  n)  into  ?t;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  35b 
to  Figure  35c.  Since  the  affected  part  of  the  upper  line  now  consists 
of  special  transmission  states,  ordinary  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just  as 
for  operation  (27'.c),  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence 
110000,  i.e.: 

(3l'.c)  Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  Vi  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrangements 
that  take  care  of  operation  (31  .a). 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  t  (which  is 

1 1 )  into  i  o,  and  the  square  under  this  (which  is  also  i  i )  also  into  i  o 
(these  two  are  the  squares  above  and  at  the  place  of  xn);  i.e.,  we  go 
from  Figure  35c  to  Figure  35d.  The  state  io  is  T030  (i.e.,  S010).  Hence 
the  sequences  11010,  11010  of  ordinary  stimuli  are  needed;  i.e.: 

(3l'.d)  Inject  the  sequence  1101011010  at  vx  . 

Now  we  can  carry  out  the  shortening  of  the  upper  line  of  Ci  .  We 
begin  by  transforming  the  entire  upper  line,  except  its  last  square 
(the  squares  above  xq  ,  Xi  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn-i — their  number  is  n)  into  i;  i.e., 
we  go  from  Figure  35d  to  Figure  35e.  Since  the  affected  part  of  the 
upper  line  consists  now  of  ordinary  states,  special  stimuli  will  do  this. 
Just  as  for  operation  (29'.a),  each  transformation  requires  the  se- 
quence 110110,  i.e.: 

(3l'.e)  Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  Ui  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP (110110),  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrangements 
that  take  care  of  operation  (31 '.a). 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  i  (which  is 
lo)  into  U;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  35e  to  Figure  35f.  For  this  a  single 
special  stimulus  is  needed,  i.e.: 

(31  i)  Inject  a  single  stimulus  at  ut  . 

At  this  point  the  shortening  of  G  is  effected,  since  the  two  right- 
most squares  have  been  transformed  into  IPs,  but  the  upper  line  is 
not  in  its  desired  state.  We  go  on  to  correct  this. 

We  transform  the  upper  line,  except  its  last  square  (the  squares 
above  xq  ,  X\  ,  •  •  •  ,  #n_2 — their  number  is  n  —  1)  into  i;  i.e.,  we  go 
from  Figure  35f  to  Figure  35g.  Since  these  squares  are  now  special 
transmission  states,  ordinary  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just  as  for  operation 
(27'. c),  each  transformation  requires  the  sequence  110000,  i.e.: 

(3l'.g)  Inject  n  —  1  sequences  110000  at  vi  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP  (110000),  with  a  delay  6n  —  6  between  turning 
on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrange- 
ments that  take  care  of  operation  (31  .a),  except  that  the  delay  to  be 
timed  is  now  shorter  by  6.  Hence  the  fixed  excess  delay,  which  must 
be  compensated  by  adjustments  "inside"  the  memory  control  MC,  is 
increased  by  G;  i.e.,  it  is  now  3(«2  +  «2  )  +  244. 

Finally,  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  ^  (which 
is  A)  into  10;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  35g  to  Figure  35h.  The  state  io 
is  T030  (i.e.,  Soio).  Hence  the  sequence  11010  of  ordinary  stimuli  is 
needed,  i.e.: 

(3l'.h)  Inject  the  sequence  11010  at  Vi  . 

This  completes  the  shortening  of  the  connecting  loop  Ci  ,  i.e.,  the 
entire  second  case,  es+1  =  —  1. 

4.2.4  Altering  xn  in  L.  We  must  now  reconsider  the  procedure  of 
altering  xn  ,  as  discussed  in  Sections  4.1.6  and  4.1.7. 

The  assumption  underlying  the  procedure  of  Sections  4.1.6  and 
4.1.7  was  that  the  altering  of  xn  follows  immediately  upon  the  "read- 
ing" of  xn  .  However,  in  Sections  4.2.1-4.2.3  we  carried  out  the  length- 
ening or  the  shortening  of  Ci  and  C2  as  if  it  occurred  between  these 
two,  i.e.,  as  if  this  lengthening  or  shortening  followed  immediately 
upon  the  reading  of  xn  .  These  two  assumptions  are  in  conflict,  and 
we  now  stipulate  that  the  last  mentioned  assumption  (i.e.,  the 
assumption  of  Sees.  4.2.1  and  4.2.3)  is  valid.  Hence  Sections  4.1.6- 
4.1.7  must  be  reconsidered. 

The  most  natural  procedure  would  be  to  review  the  changes  that 
the  lengthening  or  shortening  has  produced  in  the  relevant  structures 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




— i.e.,  to  Ci  ,  on  which  Sections  4.1.6-4.1.7  operate,  and  to  C2 , 
which  is  used  to  time  these  operations — and  to  correct  Sections  4.1.6- 
4.1.7  to  account  for  these  changes.  However,  it  is  simpler  to  analyze 
the  procedures  for  the  lengthening  and  the  shortening  themselves, 
and  to  see  in  each  case  where  the  operations  of  Sections  4.1.6-4.1.7, 
or  equivalent  ones,  fit  in  best.  It  turns  out  that  these  insertions  can 
be  effected  with  the  help  of  considerably  simplified  variants  of  Sec- 
tions 4.1.6-4.1.7. 

The  conclusion  reached  at  the  beginning  of  Section  4.1.6  still  holds: 
in  the  case  =  1  nothing  need  be  done,  while  in  the  case  i^-1  = 
0,  xn  must  be  transferred  from  !»  to  U.  Hence  we  need  to  consider 
the  latter  case  only.  However,  we  must  discuss  the  two  main  alterna- 
tives (es+1  =  1,  lengthening,  and  es+1  =  —  1,  shortening)  separately. 

Consider  first  the  case  es+1  =  1  (lengthening).  We  must  decide 
where  to  insert  the  process  of  altering  xn  from  I  o  into  U  into  the  evolu- 
tion of  Ci  according  to  Figures  33a-33h.  It  is  easily  seen  that  it  fits 
best  after  Figure  33e,  involving  a  change  of  the  evolution  through 
Figures  33f-33h,  i.e.,  of  the  steps  (29,.e)-(29,.g). 

We  modify  the  passage  from  Figure  33e  to  Figure  33f  by  transform- 
ing one  square  less,  i.e.,  into  the  passage  from  Figure  33e  to  Figure 
36a.  This  reduces  the  number  of  iterations  in  operation  (29'. e)  by 
one: 

(29'.e/)  Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  Ui  . 

This  calls  for  a  PP (110110)  with  a  delay  6n  between  turning  on 
and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrangements 
that  take  care  of  operation  (29'. a). 

Next  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  -i  (which  is 
lo)  into  1 1,  and  the  square  under  this  (which  is  also  1«)  into  U  (these 
two  are  the  squares  above  and  at  the  place  of  xn)\  i.e.,  we  go  from 
Figure  36a  to  Figure  36b.  The  state  ii  is  Ti3o  (i.e.,  Sno).  Hence  the 
sequences  11110,  1  of  special  stimuli  are  needed,  i.e.: 

(29'.f')  Inject  the  sequence  111101  at  U\  . 

Now  we  transform  the  entire  upper  line  (the  squares  above  xo , 
Xi  ,  •  •  •  ,  xn — their  number  is  n  +  1)  into  -S;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure 
36b  to  Figure  36c.  Since  the  upper  line  consists  of  special  transmission 
states,  ordinary  stimuli  will  do  this.  Just  as  for  operation  (27'.c), 
each  transformation  requires  the  sequence  110000,  i.e.: 

(29'.g')  Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110000  at  vx  . 


This  calls  for  a  PP  (110000)  with  a  delay  6n  +  6  between  turning 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


on  and  turning  off.  It  can  be  handled  by  the  same  timing  arrangements 
that  take  care  of  operation  (29'.e). 

Finally  we  transform  the  square  to  the  right  of  the  last  -°*  (which 
is  U)  into  10;  i.e.,  we  go  from  Figure  36c  to  Figure  36d.  The  state  lo 
is  T030  (i.e.,  Soio).  Hence  the  sequence  1010  of  ordinary  stimuli  is 
needed,  i.e.: 

(29'.h')  Inject  the  sequence  1010  at  Vi  . 

This  completes  the  discussion  of  the  first  case,  e8+1  =  1. 

Consider  now  the  case  es+1  =  —  1  (shortening).  We  must  decide 
where  to  insert  the  process  of  altering  io  into  U  into  the  procedure  of 
Section  4.3.2,  i.e.,  into  the  evolution  of  Ci  according  to  Figures  33a 
and  35a-35h.  It  is  easily  seen  that  it  fits  best  after  Figure  35c,  but  it 
affects  only  the  step  from  there  to  Figure  35d,  i.e.,  the  step  (3l'.d). 

Indeed,  io  at  the  place  of  xn  was  made  from  U;  hence  it  suffices 
to  make  U  instead.  That  is,  the  second  sequence  mentioned  before 
step  (3l'.d)  {it  is  11010}  must  be  replaced  by  a  single  stimulus.  Hence 
operation  (3l'.d)  is  replaced  by  this: 

(3l'.d')  Inject  the  sequence  110101  at  vi  . 

Now  the  io  at  the  place  of  xn  is  replaced  by  U  in  Figure  35d.  After 
this  the  evolution  through  Figures  35e-35h,  i.e.,  the  steps  (3l'.e)- 
(?>\r  .Yi)  can  go  on  unchanged.  In  all  Figures  35e-35h  the  only  altera- 
tion will  be  the  same  replacement  of  the  1  o  at  the  place  of  xn  by  U, 
and  this  has  no  effect  on  the  operations  mentioned  above. 

This  completes  the  discussion  of  the  second  case,  es+1  =  —1. 

4.3  The  Memory  Control  MC 

[  The  organization  and  operation  of  MC.  Figure  37  is  a 
schematic  diagram  of  the  memory  control  MC  and  the  organs  it 
controls:  the  linear  array  L,  the  connecting  loop  Ci  ,  and  the  timing 
loop  C2 .  This  figure  is  not  drawn  to  scale;  MC  is  actually  547  cells 
high  and  87  cells  wide.  We  will  first  describe  the  organization  of  MC, 
and  then  we  will  explain  how  MC  operates. 

The  most  important  parts  of  MC  are  the  read-write-erase  unit 
RWE  and  its  control  RWEC.  The  unit  RWE  is  shown  in  Figure  39 
and  developed  in  Section  4.3.3.  The  organs  marked  "0.6,"  "0.10," 
etc.,  in  Figure  39  are  the  pulsers  of  Tables  III  and  IV.  The  pulser 
marked  "0.0"  is  a  P  (10101 )  which  sends  the  sequence  10101  into 
input  Vi  of  loop  Ci  for  the  purpose  of  reading  xn  ;  the  result  which 
emerges  from  output  Wi  goes  to  the  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  ^. 
The  triple-return  counter  <f>i  has  loop  Ci  as  its  secondary  organ  £2, 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




and  the  triple-return  counter  3>2  has  loop  C2  as  its  secondary  organ. 
The  stimuli  into  RWE  from  the  left  come  from  decoders  in  CCi  , 
and  the  stimuli  going  from  RWE  to  the  left  go  into  pulsers  in  CCi  . 
The  unit  CQ  of  RWE  is  part  of  the  coded  channel  of  MC. 

The  coded  channel  of  MC  consists  of  CCi  ,  CC2  ,  CC3  ,  X,  Z,  and 
the  main  channel.  The  main  channel  goes  from  the  solid  circle  to  the 
solid  square.  The  unit  CC2  contains  decoders  whose  inputs  come  from 
the  main  channel  and  whose  outputs  go  into  RWEC.  The  unit  CC3 
contains  pulsers  whose  inputs  come  from  RWEC  and  whose  outputs 
go  to  the  main  channel.  The  units  X,  Z,  and  CCi  contain  both  de- 
coders receiving  their  inputs  from  the  main  channel  and  pulsers 
feeding  their  outputs  into  the  main  channel. 

The  read-write-erase  control  RWEC  is  shown  in  Figure  41  and  de- 
veloped in  Section  4.3.5.  It  contains  16  control  units  CO;  each  CO 
contains  a  PP(D  which  is  active  while  that  CO  is  in  control  (see 
Fig.  40  and  Sec.  4.3.4).  The  RWEC  also  contains  four  PP(T)  which 
are  used  to  store  the  bit  which  is  to  be  written  in  cell  xn  . 

The  inputs  and  outputs  of  RWEC  are  labeled  to  correspond  to  the 
inputs  and  outputs  of  RWE.  For  example,  a  stimulus  from  vi-1  goes 
into  a  pulser  of  CC3  which  sends  a  coded  sequence  into  the  main 
channel;  this  sequence  is  recognized  by  a  decoder  of  CCi  which  sends 
a  pulse  into  input  vi-1  of  RWE,  thereby  stimulating  the  pulser 
labeled  "0.0"  to  send  the  sequence  10101  into  V\  for  reading  cell  xn  . 

The  area  Y  of  MC  is  used  only  to  transfer  stimuli  from  outputs 
02 ,  03 ,  and  o5  of  the  constructing  unit  CU  to  pulsers  in  X,  and  to 
transfer  a  stimulus  from  a  decoder  in  X  to  input  %  of  CU. 

The  area  W  has  the  following  function.  Each  periodic  pulser  of 
RWE  is  to  be  on  for  about  6n  units  of  time,  where  xn  is  the  cell  of 
L  which  is  being  scanned.  The  triple-return  counter  $i  (with  d  as 
its  secondary  organ)  is  to  supply  this  delay  when  a  periodic  pulser 
is  feeding  loop  C2 ,  and  the  triple-return  counter  <I>2  (with  C2  as  its 
secondary  organ)  is  to  supply  this  delay  when  a  periodic  pulser  is 
feeding  loop  Ci  .  But  time  is  lost  between  each  of  these  triple-return 
counters  and  its  secondary  organs.  Moreover,  the  output  of  a  triple- 
return  counter  (<fv6  or  <f>2-b)  cannot  be  used  to  stop  a  periodic 
pulser  until  it  passes  through  CCi ,  the  main  channel,  CC2 ,  RWEC, 
CC3 ,  the  main  channel  again,  and  CCi  again.  Altogether  about  2000 
units  of  time  are  lost  in  these  two  ways.  Consequently,  a  periodic 
pulser  of  RWE  must  be  turned  on  about  2000  units  of  time  later  than 
the  triple-return  counter  associated  with  it.  The  exact  amount  of 
delay  needed  varies  with  each  of  the  16  control  organs  CO  of  RWEC. 
Von  Neumann  solved  the  problem  by  dividing  the  delay  area  W  into 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


four  parts  and  associating  one  part  with  each  periodic  pulser  of  RWE. 
Most  of  the  delay  needed  is  obtained  by  sending  a  pulse  through  this 
delay  area.  The  variable  part  of  the  delay  is  obtained  in  the  delay 
area  D  of  each  CO  (Fig.  40). 

We  will  next  explain  briefly  how  the  memory  control  MC  functions 
under  the  general  direction  of  the  constructing  unit  CU  (Figs.  37  and 
50).  The  basic  operation  of  reading,  writing,  and  lengthening  (or 
shortening)  the  loops  Q  and  C2  is  carried  out  in  two  stages.  First, 
CU  sends  a  signal  to  MC  telling  it  to  read;  MC  then  reads  cell  xn 
and  sends  the  result  to  CU.  Second,  CU  sends  signals  to  MC  telling 
it  what  to  write  in  cell  xn  and  whether  to  lengthen  or  shorten  the  loops 
Ci  and  C2  ;  MC  then  executes  these  instructions  and  sends  a  comple- 
tion signal  to  CU. 

The  first  stage  of  the  basic  memory  operation  begins  when  a  stimu- 
lus emerges  from  output  ox  of  CU  and  enters  the  top  of  RWEC.  It 
enters  CC3  at  vx  •  1 ,  is  coded  by  a  pulser  of  CC3 ,  enters  the  main  chan- 
nel, enters  CCi ,  is  decoded  by  a  decoder  of  CCi ,  enters  RWE  at 
Vi'l,  and  stimulates  the  pulser  P (10101)  of  RWE;  this  pulser  is 
labeled  "0.0"  in  Figure  39a.  The  sequence  10101  enters  Q  at  Vi  and 
goes  down  the  upper  part  of  Ci  .  If  cell  xn  is  in  state  U  (representing 
a  "zero")  the  sequence  10101  changes  xn  to  state  io  and  a  1  emerges 
from  exit  Wi  of  Ci  ;  if  cell  xn  is  in  state  Jo  (representing  a  "one"), 
the  complete  sequence  10101  emerges  from  exit  Wi  of  Ci  .  In  both 
cases  the  output  goes  to  the  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  ^  of  RWE. 
If  xn  stored  "zero,"  a  stimulus  emerges  from  output  b  of  and  goes 
via  ty-b,  CCi ,  the  main  channel,  CC2 ,  Sf'-fr,  and  RWEC  (near  the 
top)  to  the  input  i\  of  CU.  If  xn  stored  "one,"  a  stimulus  emerges 
from  output  c  of  and  goes  via  ■  c,  CCi ,  the  main  channel,  CC2 , 
^•c,  and  RWEC  (near  the  top)  to  the  input  i2  of  CU.  The  unit  CU 
now  knows  the  contents  of  cell  xn  .  This  completes  the  first  stage  of 
the  basic  memory  operation  of  MC. 

To  start  the  second  stage  of  the  basic  memory  operation  of  MC 
the  constructing  unit  CU  sends  the  following  signals  to  the  top  of 
MC: 

(1)  A  stimulus  from  output  o2  if  "zero"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  ;  a 
stimulus  from  output  o3  if  "one"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  . 

(2)  A  stimulus  from  output  o4  if  loops  Ci  and  C2  are  to  be  lengthened; 
a  stimulus  from  output  o5  if  loops  Ci  and  C2  are  to  be  shortened. 

We  will  trace  the  effects  of  these  stimuli  separately. 

A  stimulus  from  o2  passes  through  area  Y  and  stimulates  a  pulser 
in  area  X.  This  pulser  emits  a  coded  sequence  which  travels  along 
the  main  channel  and  enters  two  decoders  in  CC2 .  These  decoders 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




then  turn  on  two  PP(1)  of  RWEC.  One  of  these  PP(1)  is  shown  at 
the  top  of  Figure  41b;  it  is  used  to  control  the  writing  operation  if 
loops  Ci  and  C2  are  lengthened.  The  other  PP(T)  is  the  upper  PP(T) 
of  Figure  41  e;  it  is  used  to  control  the  writing  operation  if  loops 
Ci  and  C2  are  shortened.  Similarly,  a  stimulus  from_o3  causes  two 
PP(T)  of  RWEC  to  be  activated.  One  of  these  PP(1)  is  shown  in 
Figure  41c;  it  is  used  to  control  the  writing  operation  if  loops  Ci  and 
C2  are  lengthened.  The  other  PP(1)  turned  on  by  the  signal  from 
oz  is  the  lower  PP(T)  of  Figure  41e;  it  is  used  to  control  the  writing 
operation  if  loops  Ci  and  C2  are  shortened.  Both  PP(T)  turned  on  by 
signals  from  o2  (or  o3)  are  turned  off  at  the  end  of  the  basic  memory 
operation  by  the  completion  signal  that  goes  to  input  i3  of  CU. 

The  signals  from  output  o4  of  CU  (signifying  lengthening)  and 
output  o6  of  CU  (signifying  shortening)  enter  MC  in  different  ways. 
A  stimulus  from  o4  enters  the  top  of  RWEC  and  turns  on  the  first 
control  organ,  namely  COi  .  After  control  organ  COi  directs  RWE 
to  carry  out  certain  operations,  it  is  turned  off  and  the  control  organ 
C02  is  turned  on.  Then  C03  and  C04  are  used  in  a  similar  way.  At 
this  point  there  is  a  branch.  If  a  "zero"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  ,  control 
organs  C05  and  COe  are  used;  while  if  a  "one"  is  to  be  written  in 
xn  ,  control  organs  COy  and  COs  are  used.  When  either  COe  or  COs 
is  finished,  a  pulse  is  emitted  from  the  output  i%  below  it.  This  pulse 
travels  via  CC3  and  the  main  channel  to  do  two  things:  first,  it  enters 
area  X,  passes  through  area  Y,  and  enters  input  U  of  CU,  signifying 
that  the  basic  operation  of  MC  is  finished;  second,  it  enters  CC2  at 
four  places  to  turn  off  the  two  PP(T)  of  RWEC  that  were  storing 
the  bit  to  be  written  in  xn  . 

The  signal  from  output  ob  of  CU  (signifying  shortening)  passes 
through  Y,  X,  the  main  channel,  and  CC2 ,  and  enters  the  control 
organ  C09  .  Control  organs  CO9 ,  CO10 ,  COn  ,  COJ2 ,  CO^  ,  and 
CO14  are  used  in  that  order.  The  output  P  from  COh  is  gated  by  the 
PP(1)  of  Figure  41e.  If  a  "zero"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  ,  the  signal 
Vi'4  is  used;  while  if  a  "one"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  ,  the  signal  Vi-5 
is  used.  In  either  case  the  control  organs  CO15  and  COi6  are  then  used. 
When  COie  is  finished,  a  pulse  is  emitted  from  the  output  iz  below  it. 
As  in  the  case  of  lengthening,  this  pulse  does  two  things:  it  turns 
off  the  PP(T)  of  RWEC  that  were  storing  the  bit  to  be  written  in 
xn  ,  and  it  enters  input  i%  of  CU  to  signify  that  the  basic  memory 
operation  of  MC  is  finished.  At  the  end  of  a  basic  operation  the 
memory  control  MC  is  left  in  its  original  state. 

Table  V  summarizes  the  effect  of  the  control  organs  of  RWEC  on 
the  pulsers  and  periodic  pulsers  of  RWE.  We  will  illustrate  how  these 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


control  organs  work  by  tracing  the  action  of  COi  .  The  design  of  a 
CO  is  given  in  Figure  40;  all  CO  are  the  same  except  for  the  length  of 
the  delay  path  (B.  The  particular  control  organ  COi  is  located  at  the 
top  of  RWEC  (Fig.  41a).  The  state  of  the  connecting  loop  Ci  and 
the  linear  array  L  at  the  time  COi  takes  control  is  shown  in  Figure 
33a;  loop  Ci  passes  through  cell  xn  and  consists  entirely  of  ordinary 
transmission  states.  The  state  of  the  timing  loop  C2  at  the  time  COi 
takes  control  is  shown  in  Figure  32a;  the  effect  of  COi  on  C2  is  shown 
in  Figures  32b  and  32c. 

The  action  of  COi  is  as  follows.  The  stimulus  from  output  o4  of 
CU  (signifying  lengthening)  enters  input  a  of  COi  and  accomplishes 
three  tasks.  First,  it  goes  via  the  top  and  left  side  of  COi  to  enter 
input  a+  of  the  alternate  PP(T)  of  COi  ,  thereby  activating  this 
periodic  pulser,  which  will  be  on  while  COi  is  in  control.  Second,  the 
input  a  of  COi  goes  from  output  c  of  COi  into  input  $i  •  a  of  CC3  ; 
from  there  via  CC3 ,  the  main  channel,  and  Cd  to  output  <3va  of 
CCi  ;  and  from  there  into  input  a  of  the  triple-return  counter  <f>i  of 
RWE  (Fig.  39a),  thereby  starting  this  triple-return  counter.  Third, 
the  input  a  of  COi  goes  via  the  delay  path  (B  of  COi  to  output  b  of 
COi  ;  from  there  to  input  u2-a+  of  CC3  ;  thence  via  CC3 ,  the  main 
channel,  and  Z  into  the  delay  area  W;  through  a  portion  of  W  and 
back  through  Z  to  the  main  channel;  through  CCi  to  output  u2-a+ 
of  CCi  ;  and  from  there  to  input  a+  of  the  periodic  pulser  PP  (110110) 
in  the  lower  part  of  RWE  (Fig.  39b),  thereby  starting  this  periodic 
pulser.  The  sequence  110110  repeatedly  enters  input  u2  of  loop  C2 . 
Each  110110  converts  a  cell  of  the  upper  part  of  C2  from  ^  to  in 
the  following  way:  T  kills  _o  to  U,  1011  changes  U  to  according  to  the 
direct  process  of  Figure  10,  and  the  final  0  has  no  effect.  Hence  n 
occurrences  of  the  sequence  110110  into  u2  will  convert  the  upper  part 
of  loop  C2  from  the  path  shown  in  Figure  32a  to  the  path  shown  in 
Figure  32b. 

The  production  of  n  sequences  110110  is  controlled  by  the  triple- 
return  counter  <f>i  of  RWE,  which  uses  the  loop  Ci  as  its  secondary 
organ  U.  The  output  from  b  of  <$>i  is  used  to  turn  off  the  PP  (110110) 
of  Figure  39b  in  the  following  way.  The  output  from  b  of  <$i  enters 
CCi  at  goes  through  CCi  to  the  main  channel  and  to  CC3 ,  and 
enters  input  d  of  each  of  the  control  organs  COi ,  C02 ,  C09 ,  COio , 
COn  ,  and  COi2 .  All  these  CO  are  inactive  except  for  COi ,  so  in 
every  case  except  this  one  the  effect  of  the  input  to  d  to  a  CO  is  only 
to  attempt  to  turn  off  an  alternate  PP(1)  which  is  already  off.  This 
does  no  harm,  as  we  saw  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.2.  In  the  case  of 
COi  ,  the  input  to  d  turns  its  PP(1)  off  and  also  passes  through  the 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




confluent  cell  at  the  lower  right  of  COi  and  exits  at  e  and  /.  The 
"off"  signal  into  a_  of  PP(T)  causes  a  stop  at  6  too  late  to  block  the 
emission  from  e  and  /. 

The  output  from  e  of  COi  enters  CC3  at  w2-a_  ;  goes  through 
CC3 ,  the  main  channel,  and  CCi  ;  leaves  CCi  at  u2  •  a_  and  enters 
PP(llOllO)  at  a_  .  In  this  way  PP (110110)  is  shut  off  after  it  has 
emitted  exactly  n  sequences  110110. 

The  output  from  /  of  COi  goes  to  two  different  places.  First,  it  enters 
CC3  at  u2  - 1 ;  it  passes  through  CC3 ,  the  main  channel,  and  CCi  ;  and 
finally  it  leaves  CCi  2Xu2-l  and  enters  the  pulser  P (II  101001 ),  which 
is  marked  "0.2"  in  Figure  39b.  The  sequence  11101001  then  enters 
input  u2  of  C2 .  The  first  half  (1110)  of  this  sequence  changes  a  U  to 
ii,  while  the  last  half  (1001)  of  this  sequence  changes  the  next  U  to 

Hence  loop  C2  is  left  in  the  state  shown  in  Figure  32c. 

Second,  the  output  from  /  of  COi  enters  input  a  of  C02 ,  thereby 
starting  the  operation  controlled  by  C02 .  The  periodic  pulser  of 
RWE  which  is  controlled  by  C02  produces  the  result  given  in  Figure 
32d,  and  the  pulser  of  RWE  which  is  controlled  by  C02  produces  the 
result  shown  in  Figure  32e.  Thus  the  control  organs  COx  and  C02 
together  bring  about  the  lengthening  of  the  timing  loop  C2  .  The 
control  organ  C02  then  passes  control  to  C03  .] 

4.3.2  Detailed  discussion  of  the  functioning  of  MC.  We  enumerated 
in  Section  4.1.4  the  specific  functions  of  the  memory  control  MC, 
namely:  a  purely  descriptive  static  statement  in  (1),  the  start  in  (2), 
the  substantive  operations  in  (3)  {reading  xn),  (6)  {altering  xn},  and 
(7)  {moving  xn  ,  i.e.,  n  =  n\ ;  and  the  completion  in  (8).  {All  these 
numbers  refer  to  the  listing  in  Sec.  4.1.4.}  Postulate  (1)  calls  for  no 
action.  The  implementation  of  (2)  {responding  to  a  starting  signal 
from  CU  to  MC}  and  of  (8)  {delivering  a  completion  signal  from 
MC  to  CU} ,  is  easy;  we  will  attach  these  where  they  obviously  belong, 
at  the  beginning  of  (3)  and  at  the  end  of  (8),  respectively.  Carrying 
out  the  other  substantive  operations  (3),  (6),  and  (7)  is,  of  course, 
much  more  complicated;  Sections  4.1.5-4.2.4  gave  an  outline  of  this. 
Now  that  this  outline  is  completed,  we  must  perform  the  necessary 
constructions  in  detail.  In  other  words,  we  must  fill  in  specific  com- 
ponentry to  execute  the  operations  enumerated  and  discussed  in 
Sections  4.1.5-4.2.4.  We  proceed  to  do  this  in  what  follows. 

We  discussed  operation  (3)  first  in  Section  4.1.5.  We  then  took  up 
operation  (6)  in  Sections  4.1.6-4.1.7,  but  this  was  only  a  preliminary 
discussion;  the  final  form  was  developed  in  Section  4.2.4.  This  form 
was  actually  meant  to  be  meshed  with  the  processing  of  operation 
(7).  The  latter  was  discussed  in  Sections  4.2.1-4.2.2.  Thus  the  com- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


plete  discussion  must  begin  with  Section  4.1.5  and  then  continue  with 
Sections  4.2.1-4.2.3,  the  latter  being  combined  with  Section  4.2.4. 

Section  4.1.5  requires  us  to  inject  the  sequence  10101  (with  a 
guaranteed  00  thereafter)  at  vi  and  to  feed  the  output  of  w\  into  the 
input  a  of  the  T  vs.  10101  discriminator  ^  of  Figure  25.  The  outputs 
b  and  c  of  ^  then  indicate  T  (i.e.,  xn  =  U  and  £n  =  0)  and  10101  (i.e., 
xn  =  io,  and      =  1),  respectively. 

Sections  4.2.1-4.2.3,  combined  with  Section  4.2.4,  call  for  more 
complicated  arrangements.  Section  4.2.1  does  not  describe  any 
specific  operations.  Section  4.2.2  postulates  a  definite  sequence  of 
operations:  (28'.a)-(28'.d),  and  (29'.a)-(29'.g).  Section  4.2.4  re- 
places operations  (29'.e)-(29'.g)  by  operations  (29'.e')-(29'.h'). 
Section  4.2.3  postulates  these  operations :  (30/.a)-(30/.g)  and  (3l'.a)- 
(31/.h).  Section  4.2.4  replaces  operation  (3l'.d)  by  operation  (3l'.d'). 
Note  that  Sections  4.2.2  and  4.2.3  are  alternative,  depending  on  the 
value  of  es+1  (whether  es+1  =  1  or  —1,  respectively),  i.e.,  on  the  first 
response  of  CU  according  to  postulate  (5)  in  Section  4.1.4.  The 
insertion  of  Section  4.2.4  into  Sections  4.2.2  and  4.2.3  is  also  condi- 
tional, depending  on  the  value  of  £ns+1  (it  takes  place  only  if  £ns+1  =  0; 
cf.  the  beginning  of  Sec.  4.1.6),  i.e.,  on  the  second  response  of  CU 
according  to  postulate  (5)  in  Section  4.1.4. 

In  order  to  describe  the  communications  between  CU  and  MC,  and 
in  view  of  the  fact  that  we  will  not  describe  here  in  detail  the  internal 
functioning  of  CU,  we  must  define  certain  specific  inputs  and  outputs 
of  CU. 

The  inputs  of  CU  correspond  to  the  signals  that  go  from  MC  to 
CU  according  to  postulates  (l)-(9)  in  Section  4.1.4.  These  are  the 
following  : 

(11)  A  signal  according  to  (3),  indicating  that  £ns  (n  =  n)  has  been 
read  by  MC  and  found  to  be  0;  i.e.,  xn  =  U. 

(12)  A  signal  according  to  (3),  indicating  that  £ns  (n  =  n)  has  been 
read  by  MC  and  found  to  be  1;  i.e.,  xn  =  i°. 

(z3)  The  completion  signal  of  MC  according  to  (8). 

For  each  one  of  these  signals  the  symbol  in  parentheses  which 
precedes  it  is  the  designation  of  the  input  of  CU  to  which  it  is  to  go. 
That  is,  these  inputs  are  . 

The  outputs  of  CU  correspond  to  the  signals  that  go  from  CU  to 
MC  according  to  postulates  (l)-(9)  in  Section  4.1.4.  These  are  the 
following : 

(01)  The  start  signal  to  MC  according  to  (2). 

(02)  A  signal  according  to  (5),  indicating  that  £ns+1  (n  =  n)  has 
been  formed  by  CU  and  found  to  be  0. 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND   ITS  CONTROL  233 

(a3)  A  signal  according  to  (5),  indicating  that  (n  =  n)  has 

been  formed  by  CU  and  found  to  be  1. 

(04)  A  signal  according  to  (5),  indicating  that  es+1  has  been  formed 
by  CU  and  found  to  be  1. 

(05)  A  signal  according  to  (5),  indicating  that  es+1  has  been  formed 
by  CU  and  found  to  be  —1. 

For  each  one  of  these  signals  the  symbol  in  parentheses  which 
precedes  it  is  a  designation  of  the  output  of  CU  from  which  it  is  to 
come.  That  is,  these  outputs  are  01-05 . 

Our  discussion  above  further  shows  that  the  signals  from  04  and 
05  are  immediately  effective  on  MC:  they  determine  whether  MC 
enters  the  action  cycle  (28'.a)-(28'.d),  (29'.a)- (29'.g)  {with  a 
possible  replacement  of  (29'.e)-(29'.g)  by  (29'.e')-(29'.h')}  or  the 
action  cycle  (30'.a)-(30'.g),  (3l'.a)-(3l'.h)  {with  a  possible  re- 
placement of  (3l'.d)  by  (3l'.d')}.  Obviously,  the  signal  from  01, 
too,  is  immediately  effective  on  MC:  it  is  a  start  signal. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  signals  from  02  and  03  are  not  immediately 
effective  on  MC:  they  determine  whether  the  replacements  referred 
to  above  will  be  made  in  the  action  cycles  generated  by  04  and  05  . 
(03  causes  the  replacement  to  be  omitted;  o2  causes  it  to  occur.) 
Consequently,  o2  and  03  cannot  act  directly  on  the  modus  operandi 
of  MC.  They  must,  instead,  activate  two  (alternative)  memory 
organs  in  MC  which  can  then  effect  the  operations  of  MC  when  they 
reach  those  points  where  this  is  required.  Let  the  memory  organs 
activated  by  02  and  03  be  designated  by  a0  and  ax  ,  respectively. 

These  considerations  are  summarized  in  Figure  38,  which  shows 
schematically  the  logical  structure  of  the  procedure  that  MC  is  to 
follow. 

In  this  figure  the  arrows  (horizontal  and  vertical)  indicate  the 
path  of  stimulation.  The  double  horizontal  lines  separate  areas  within 
which  the  stimulation  passes  entirely  through  the  channels  in  MC 
to  be  constructed,  while  these  double  lines  themselves  are  crossed 
by  processes  that  take  place  outside  these  channels.  (As  a  rale  these 
processes  take  place  in  CU,  but  in  one  case,  that  of  the  second  double 
line  from  above,  they  take  place  within  the  discriminator  ^. ) 

The  single  horizontal  lines  separate  alternatives;  i.e.,  the  two 
processes  at  the  two  sides  of  such  a  single  horizontal  line,  but  between 
a  pair  of  double  horizontal  lines,  represent  alternatives  that  are  in 
fact  mutually  exclusive. 

Each  bracketed  equation  on  the  left  margin  indicates  a  value  of 
or  £ns+1  or  es+1  that  is  characteristically  associated  with  the  alterna- 
tive shown  next  to  the  equation  in  question. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


The  figure  contains  seven  groups  of  operations,  referred  to  by 
the  numbers  { (28'.a)-(3l'.h)}  by  which  they  were  designated  in 
Sections  4.2.2-4.2.4.  These  are  restated  explicitly  in  Table  II. 

We  have  given  these  operations  new  designations  (0.1)- (0.31), 
which  are  shown  in  Table  II,  for  the  sake  of  convenience,  in  juxta- 
position with  the  old  designations  (28'.a)-(3l'.h).  Among  the  31 
operations  (0.1)- (0.31)  there  are  16  with  an  asterisk  and  15  without. 
The  former  are  repetitions  (norn+  lorn  -  1  repetitions;  cf.  there), 
hence  they  have  to  be  executed  by  suitable  periodic  pulsers  (PP's), 
for  whose  turning  on  and  turning  off  arrangements  with  appropriate 
delays  must  be  made.  The  latter  are  single  operations;  hence  they 
call  for  ordinary  pulsers  (P's)  only.  Two  of  these  { (0.19)  and  (0.29)} 
require  even  no  P,  since  they  call  for  the  injection  of  single  stimuli 
only. 

The  turning  on  and  turning  off  and  concomitant  delay  arrange- 
ments for  the  PP  (for  the  16  operations  with  an  asterisk)  were  dis- 
cussed in  Sections  4.2.2-4.2.4.  In  each  case  this  required  using  a 
triple-return  counter  <£  (cf.  Fig.  23).  The  use  of  this  organ  for  this 
purpose  was  introduced  in  Section  4.1.7,  after  operation  (27'.a'), 
and  in  Section  4.1.9,  after  operation  (28'.a).  In  the  first  case  <£  had 
to  be  attached  to  C2 ,  i.e.,  its  output  d  to  v2  and  its  input  c  to  w2 .  In 
the  second  case  $  had  to  be  attached  to  Ci ,  i.e.,  its  output  d  to  vx  and 
its  input  c  to  Wi  .  The  subsequent  discussions  in  Sections  4.2.2-4.2.6 
showed  that  these  were  the  only  two  forms  in  which  $  was  required. 
We  therefore  provide  two  triple-return  counters,  <J>X  and  <£2 ,  the  first 
one  being  attached  to  Ci  (i.e.,  its  input  c  =  Ci  to  W\  and  its  output 
d  ==  di  to  ^i),  and  the  second  one  to  C2  (i.e.,  its  input  c  =  c2  to  w2 
and  its  output  d  =  d2  to  v2).  The  notations  introduced  in  Section 
4.2.2  after  operation  (28'.a),  and  in  Section  4.1.7  after  operation 
(29'.a'),  apply  to  3>i  and  3>2 ,  respectively.  Thus  5/'  is  the  delay  from 
Wi  to  Ci  and  6/  is  the  delay  from  di  to  vx  (these  refer  to  3>i),  while 
b"  is  the  delay  from  w2  to  c2  and  52  is  the  delay  from  d2  to  v2  (these 
refer  to  3>2). 

Of  the  16  operations  with  asterisks,  6  have  to  be  timed  by  $i 
{(0.1),  (0.3),  (0.16),  (0.18),  (0.20),  (0.22)}  and  10  have  to  be  timed 
by  *2  {(0.5),  (0.7),  (0.9),  (0.11),  (0.13),  (0.15),  (0.23),  (0.25), 
(0.28),  (0.30)}.  Of  the  6  in  the  first  class,  3  require  a  PP (110110) 
with  its  output  attached  to  { (0.1),  (0.16),  (0.20)}  and  3  require 
a  PP (110000)  with  its  output  attached  to  v2  { (0.3),  (0.18),  (0.22)}. 
Of  the  10  in  the  second  class,  5  require  a  PP(llOllO)  with  its  output 
attached  to  ux  {(0.5),  (0.9),  (0.13),  (0.23),  (0.28)}  and  5  require  a 
PP(  110000)  with  its  output  attached  to  vx  {(0.7),  (0.11),  (0.15), 


Table  II 

Summary  of  the  pulse  sequences  sent  into  loops  Ci  and  C2 


New 
Designation 


Former 
Designation 


Operation 


(/)  Group  (28' .a)-(28' .d)  and  (29' .a)- (29' .d)  of  Section  4.2., 
Inject  n  -f-  1  sequences  110110  at  u2  . 
Inject  the  sequence  11101001  at  u2  . 
Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110000  at  v2  . 
Inject  the  sequence  11010  at  v2  . 
Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  ui  . 


(0 

1)* 

(28 '.a) 

(0 

2) 

(28'.b) 

(0 

3)* 

(28'.c) 

(0 

4) 

(28,.d) 

(0 

5)* 

(29\a) 

(0 

6) 

(29'. b) 

(0 

7)* 

(29'. c) 

(0 

8) 

(29'. d) 

Inject  the  sequence  1111011110110111001  at  m 
Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  V\  . 


Inject  the  sequence  110101101011001  at  vi 
(II)  Group  (29'.e')-(29'.h')  of  Section  4.24 


(0 

9)* 

(29'. e') 

Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  ui  . 

(0 

10) 

(29'.f) 

Inject  the  sequence  111101  at  ui  . 

(0 

11)* 

(29' .g') 

Inject  n  +  1  sequences  110000  at  Vi 

(0 

12) 

(29'.  h') 

Inject  the  sequence  1010  at  V\  . 

(0 

13)* 

(29'  .e) 

(0 

14) 

(29'.f) 

(0 

15)* 

(29'.g) 

(IV) 

Group  (3 

(0 

16)* 

(30'. a) 

(0 

17) 

(30'. b) 

(0 

18)* 

(30'.c) 

(0 

19) 

(30'.  d) 

(0 

20)* 

(30'. e) 

(0 

21) 

(30'.  f) 

(0 

22)* 

(30'. g) 

(0 

23)* 

(31'. a) 

(0 

24) 

(31'.b) 

(0 

25)* 

(31'. c) 

(III)  Group  (29f.e)-(29f.g)  of  Section  4.2.2 

Inject  ?i  +  l  sequences  110110  at  ui  . 
Inject  the  sequence  1010  at  u\  . 
Inject  Ti  +  l  sequences  110000  at  V\  . 
a)-(30'.g)  and  (31' .a)- (31' x)  of  Section  4-2.3 
Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  u2  . 
Inject  the  sequence  111101  at  u2  . 
Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  v2  . 
Inject  a  single  stimulus  at  v2  . 
Inject  n  —  1  sequences  110110  at  u2  . 
Inject  the  sequence  11010  at  u2  . 
Inject  n  —  1  sequences  110000  at  v2  . 
Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  ui  . 


Inject  the  sequence  11110111101  at  ui 
Inject  n  sequences  110000  at  V\  . 

(V)  Group  (31'. d')  of  Section  4-2 4 
(0.26)      |     (31'.d')    |  Inject  the  sequence  110101  at  vi  . 

(VI)  Group  (31'. d)  of  Section  4.2.8 
Inject  the  sequence  1101011010  at  vi  . 

oup  (31'.e)-(31'.h)  of  Section  4.2.3 


(0 

27) 

(31'.d) 

(VII) 

(0 

28)* 

(31'.e) 

(0 

29) 

(31'.f ) 

(0 

30)* 

(31'.g) 

(0 

31) 

(31'.h) 

Inject  n  sequences  110110  at  u\  . 
Inject  a  single  stimulus  at  ui  . 
Inject  n  —  1  sequences  110000  at  vi  . 
Inject  the  sequence  11010  at  V\  . 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(0.25),  (0.30)}.  The  delay  requirements  were  expressed  in  Sections 
4.2.2-4.2.4  by  specifying  the  amount  by  which  the  delay  from  the 
turning  on  to  the  turning  off  of  each  PP  is  exceeded  by  the  delay  from 
the  input  a  to  the  output  b  of  its  <£.  These  excess  amounts  are  restated 
in  Table  III,  together  with  the  <£  and  PP  data  given  above. 

Regarding  the  15  operations  without  an  asterisk  we  need  only 
specify  which  one  of  the  inputs  U\  ,  vx  of  Ci  and  u2 ,  v2  of  C2  each 
operation  feeds.  Actually,  5  feed  into  wi{  (0.6),  (0.10),  (0.14),  (0.24), 
(0.29)},  5  feed  into  t*  { (0.8),  (0.12),  (0.26),  (0.27),  (0.31)},  3  feed 
into  u2  { (0.2),  (0.17),  (0.21)},  and  2  feed  into  v2  { (0.4),  (0.19)}.  They 
are  shown  in  a  systematic  arrangement  in  Table  IV,  together  with 
the  pertinent  P  data.  We  also  show  in  this  table  a  reference  to  an 
additional  sequence  that  has  to  be  injected  at  V\  at  a  certain  occasion. 
This  is  the  entry  (0.0),  which  refers  to  the  sequence  10101  that  occurs 
in  the  top  line  of  Figure  38.  Finally,  we  show  (for  later  use)  for  each 
P  its  length  and  height.  [  There  were  several  errors  in  von  Neumann's 


Table  III 

Summary  of  excess  delay  requirements  for  the  periodic  pulsers  stimulating  loops 

Ci  and  C2 


Operation 

PP  Used 

Output  of  PP 
Attached  to 

3>  Used 

Excess  Delay 

3(6V  +  Sf)  +  a2| 

where  a^  is 

(0.5) 


(0.9) 


(0.13) 

^PP(llOllO) 

Ui 


(0.23) 


(0.28) 


(0.7) 


(0.11) 


(0.15) 

►PP  (110000) 

Vi 


(0.25) 


(0.30) 

j 


3(6V  +  670  +  oi  , 
where  ai  is 

(0.1) 


(0.16) 

>PP  (110110) 

U2 


(0.20) 

><*>! 


(0.3) 


(0.18) 

>PP(110000) 


(0.22) 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




Table  IV 


The  pulsers  used  to  stimulate  loops  Ci  and  C2 


Operation 

P  Used 

Output  of  P 
Attached  to 

Length 

(2k) 

Height 

(«+  2) 

(0.6) 

P(llllOllllOllOlllOOl) 



(0.10) 

P(llllOl) 



(0.14) 

p(IoTb) 

►  Ui 



(0.24) 

P(llllOllllOl) 



(0.29) 

Single  stimulus 


(0.0) 

i>  /1  ni  ni  \ 
F(1U1U1 ) 

a 

er 

(0.8) 

P(llOlOllOlOllOOl) 



(0.12) 

p(ioio) 

*  Vi 



(0.26) 

P(110101) 



(0.27) 

P(1101011010) 



CO  31) 

P  (11010) 



(0.2) 

P(11101001) 

\ 



(0.17) 

P(llllOl) 

(  U2 



(0.21) 

P(11010) 



(0.4) 

P(11010) 

|  v2 



(0.19) 

Single  stimulus 


Table  IV.  These  have  been  corrected  according  to  the  rule  stated 
in  the  editorial  summary  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.1.] 

4.3.3  The  read-write-erase  unit  RWE.4  Figure  38  and  the  three 
tables  in  Section  4.3.2,  together  with  the  other  listings  given  there, 
provide  a  definite  basis  for  the  construction  announced  at  the  be- 
ginning of  that  subsection.  We  can  therefore  approach  this  construc- 
tion now  in  more  complete  and  specific  terms. 

The  operations  that  we  wish  to  instrument  primarily  affect  Ci 
and  C2  ;  i.e.,  they  interact  with  the  inputs  ux  ,  V\  and  u2 ,  v2  of  these 
organs  and  with  their  outputs  wi  and  w2  .  It  is  therefore  best  to  start 
our  constructions  with  the  organs  that  are  in  direct  contact  with 
U\  ,  Vi ,  Wi  and  u2 ,  v2 ,  w2 .  These  are  specified  in  Tables  III  and  IV, 
together  with  the  ^  referred  to  in  lines  2-4  of  Figure  38.  The  func- 
tioning of  all  these  organs  is  controlled  in  the  manner  described  in 
Figure  38  and  in  Table  II. 

4  [Von  Neumann's  title  for  the  present  subsection  was  "The  effector  organs 
of  B.  Positioning  and  connecting  these  organs."] 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Hence  we  begin  by  providing  and  positioning  the  organs  of  Tables 
III  and  IV,  as  well  as  ^. 

Table  IV  calls  for  16  organs,  14  of  which  are  pulsers  (P),  while  2 
are  merely  providers  of  single  stimuli.  Each  of  these  is  actuated  by  a 
single  input,  coming  from  RWEC  (cf.  Fig.  37),  and  has  a  single  out- 
put, feeding  into  one  of  u\ ,  v\ ,  u2 ,  v2 . 

Table  III  calls  for  the  following  organs.  First,  2  periodic  pulsers 
{PP(llOllO)  and  PP (110000))  are  required,  but  since  each  of  these 
is  required  with  two  different  output  connections  (u\  and  Vi  in  the 
first  case,  u2  and  v2  in  the  second  case),  therefore  only  4  periodic 
pulsers  are  actually  needed.  (Table  III  also  shows  that  each  one  of 
these  PP  is  required  in  several  different  situations — their  numbers 
are  5,  5,  3,  3,  respectively — requiring  different  "excess  delays."  This 
might  incline  one  to  introduce  a  separate  PP  for  each  such  case,  i.e., 
16  in  all,  instead  of  the  above  4.  However,  it  is  more  convenient  to 
take  care  of  this  by  other  arrangements,  which  will  appear  further 
below,  and  to  introduce  only  4  PP's,  as  indicated  above.)  Second, 
Table  III  requires  a  triple-return  counter  ($),  but  since  this  is  re- 
quired with  two  different  c,  d-connections  (vi  ,  W\  in  one  case  and 
v2 ,  w2  in  the  other)  actually  two  such  organs  are  called  for.  Each  PP 
is  controlled  by  two  inputs  a+  and  a_  ,  coming  from  MC,  and  has  a 
single  output  feeding  into  one  of  ux  ,  V\  ,  u2  ,  v2 .  Each  <£  has  an  input- 
output  pair  a,  b  connected  to  MC,  and  an  input-output  pair  c,  d 
connected  to  Vi  ,  Wi  or  to  v2 ,  w2  . 

Finally,  we  need  the  T  vs.  10101  discriminator  ^.  This  has  a  single 
input  a  which  is  attached  to  Wi  and  two  outputs  6,  c  going  to 
RWEC  (cf.  Fig.  38). 

[  Von  Neumann  overlooked  one  point  when  attaching  the  input  a  of 
^  to  the  output  Wi  of  Ci  .  When  Ci  is  used  to  time  the  lengthening  (or 
shortening)  of  the  timing  loop  C2 ,  single  pulses  will  go  from  wx  to  the 
triple-return  counter  $>i  in  Figure  39.  But  these  pulses  will  also  enter 
^,  which  will  then  indicate  a  T  received  to  the  constructing  unit  CU. 

We  will  assume  that  the  constructing  unit  CU  will  be  built  so  as 
to  ignore  these  spurious  signals.  Alternatively,  the  input  to  ^  could 
be  closed  by  a  gate  controlled  from  a  PP(1)  w7hen  $i  is  in  use.  This 
would,  of  course,  change  the  design  of  RWE  somewhat.] 

All  these  organs  are  shown  in  Figure  39  in  their  relative  positions 
with  respect  to  Ci  ,  C2  (i.e.,  Ui  ,  Vi  ,  Wi ,  u2  ,  v 2 ,  w2)  on  one  hand  and 
with  respect  to  MC  on  the  other.  The  sub-organs  contained  in  this 
assembly  are  P's  (designated  0.6-0.24,  0.0-0.31,  0.2-0.21,  0.4),  PPJs, 
<£'s  (designated  $i  ,  <£2),  and  a  ^.  All  of  these  are  not  shown  in  their 
true  sizes.  The  entire  assembly  is  part  of  MC.  To  the  left,  across  the 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




vertical  dashed  line,  it  is  attached  to  the  remainder  of  MC.  To  the 
right  it  is  attached  to  Ci  ,  C2 ,  as  indicated.  The  P  of  Table  IV  are 
indicated  by  their  0  symbols,  except  for  the  two  single-stimulation 
organs  which  are  shown  as  direct  channels.  All  inputs  and  outputs  of 
the  sub-organs  that  occur  (P,  PP,  <£,  ^)  are  properly  indicated.  The 
various  inputs  and  outputs  that  connect  this  assembly  with  the 
remainder  of  MC  are  marked  with  symbols  that  are  self-explanatory. 
Inspection  shows  that  there  are  30  connections  of  the  latter  kind,  of 
which  4  are  inputs  to  MC  and  26  are  outputs  from  MC. 

Note,  furthermore,  that  while  the  P,  PP,  and  <£  are  in  their  standard 
orientations,  i.e.,  in  the  orientations  of  Figures  16,  18,  and  23,  the  ^ 
is  reflected  about  the  vertical  in  comparison  to  its  standard  arrange- 
ment in  Figure  25.  Clearly,  this  calls  merely  for  trivial  transformations 
of  the  construction.  (Fig.  25  contains  a  P  and  a  D,  and  these,  too, 
must  be  reflected  about  the  vertical.  This  calls  for  corresponding 
transformations  in  connection  with  Figs.  16  and  22.  These,  too,  are 
harmless;  cf.  the  discussion  in  the  middle  part  of  Sec.  3.6.1  in  connec- 
tion with  Fig.  29.) 

The  assembly  of  Figure  39  must  be  controlled,  as  we  pointed  out 
at  the  beginning  of  this  section,  according  to  the  scheme  described  in 
Figure  38  and  in  Table  II.  The  organs  which  effect  this  control  must 
occupy  the  deeper  interior  of  MC.  We  saw  in  Figure  39  that  the  num- 
ber of  connections  between  this  region,  and  between  the  assembly 
that  was  explicitly  described,  is  quite  large,  4  inputs  and  26  outputs. 
This  makes  it  a  practical  certainty  that  the  lines  representing  these 
30  connections  will  have  to  cross  each  other  many  times  in  order  to 
find  their  proper  endings  on  the  control  organs  within  MC.  This 
means  that  the  need  for  the  organ  that  circumvents  the  difficulties 
of  line-crossing  has  arisen;  i.e.,  we  need  the  coded  channel  of  Section 
3.6. 

We  are  not  yet  in  a  position  to  lay  out  the  entire  coded  channel 
that  will  be  required,  i.e.,  to  select  the  appropriate  arrangement,  as 
discussed  in  the  first  part  of  Section  3.6.1  and  schematically  shown  in 
Figures  28g-28k.  This  will  be  done  later.  For  the  time  being,  we  will 
concern  ourselves  only  with  the  portion  that  is  adjacent  to  the 
assembly  of  Figure  39,  i.e.,  that  may  be  thought  of  as  extending  along 
the  vertical  dotted  line  on  the  left  edge  of  that  figure. 

We  saw  above  that  30  lines  (4  inputs  and  26  outputs)  connect  with 
this  portion.  Each  of  these  is  stimulated  (or  stimulates)  independently 
of  the  others.  That  is,  in  the  notations  used  at  the  beginning  of  Sec- 
tion 3.6.1,  they  correspond  to  inputs  av  or  outputs  bv  (from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  coded  channel)  with  different  v.  Hence  the  total  range 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n  must  allow  for  at  least  30  different  possibilities.  That 
is,  necessarily  n  ^  30.  Actually  it  is  advisable  to  choose  n  somewhat 
larger,  since  further  requirements  of  the  control  MC  will  call  for 
additional  v  values  for  the  inputs  av  and  outputs  bv  of  the  coded 
channel.  (Cf.  below.) 

On  this  basis  we  will  now  choose  the  m  and  k  referred  to  in  the 
middle  part  of  Section  3.6.1,  which  determine  the  coded  sequences 
ivl  •  •  ■  ivm  that  correspond  to  the  v  (v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n).  In  this  respect 
equation  (12')  and  the  observation  following  equation  (13')  are 
relevant:  given  m,  these  observations  determine  k  (  =  (m  +  l)/2  or 
ra/2,  whichever  is  an  integer)  and  the  former  determines 


Max  n 

The  following  m  are  critical : 

m 
k 

Max  n 


(m  -  l\ 


7     8  9 
4     4  5 
20    35  70 


Since  we  want  n  ^  30,  with  a  reasonable  margin  to  spare,  m  =  7  is 
inadequate,  m  =  8  is  marginal  (it  will  prove  to  be  inadequate,  cf. 
below),  while  m  =  9  is  presumably  adequate  (it  will  prove  to  be 
adequate;  cf.  below).  We  choose  therefore 

(32')  m  =  9,  k  =  5 

so  that  n  is  limited  by 

(33')  n  ^  70 

only. 


According  to  Section  3.6.1,  each  sequence  i,1  •  •  •  ivm  begins  with  a 
T,  has  length  m  =  9,  and  contains  k  =  5  I's.  That  is,  it  is  1  iv2  •  •  •  £„9, 
where  among  the  i2,  •  •  •  ,  i  there  are  four  l's  and  four  0's.  We  know 
that  there  are  precisely 


(r:)=C)= ™ 


such  sequences.  Let  us  order  them  lexicographically,  and  use  the 
v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  70,  to  enumerate  them  in  this  order.  This,  then,  defines 
i,1  -  •  •  i,m  =  1  iv2  -  •  •  iv9  for  each  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  70,  thus  certainly  in- 
cluding the  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  n  {for  any  n  according  to  condition  (33  )}. 
Let  us  assign  to  the  30  av  and  bv  of  Figure  39  (i.e.,  to  the  ux  •  1,  •  •  •  , 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




<J>2  a  occurring  there)  the  numbers  v  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  30,  in  a  vertically 
descending  sequence,  according  to  that  figure. 

[  Von  Neumann  proceeded  to  calculate  the  dimensions  of  the 
assembly  of  Fig.  39. 

It  turns  out  that  the  height  of  CCi  is  greater  than  the  height  of 
RWE.  Since  von  Neumann  wanted  to  place  each  pulser  and  decoder 
of  CCi  nearly  opposite  the  organ  of  RWE  to  which  it  is  connected, 
the  height  of  CCi  controls  the  height  of  the  complex  CQ-RWE.  Now 
CCi  has  4  pulsers  P  and  26  decoders  D.  Von  Neumann  said  that  the 
height  of  each  is  7,  and,  allowing  a  protective  strip  of  U's  between 
each  two  consecutive  organs,  he  arrived  at  a  height  of  239  for  CCi . 

But  this  is  wrong.  The  sequences  von  Neumann  was  using  in  his 
coded  channel  are  of  length  nine;  each  begins  with  a  one  and  contains 
four  additional  ones.  By  the  rule  of  Section  3.3  for  computing  the 
size  of  a  decoder,  the  height  of  a  decoder  for  a  sequence  of  length 
nine  with  five  ones  is  either  10  or  11,  depending  on  the  specific  se- 
quence. In  fact,  the  rule  of  Section  3.3  often  gives  a  height  which  is 
greater  than  the  actual  height  of  a  decoder  constructed  by  the  design 
algorithm  of  Section  3.3.  But  even  when  this  is  taken  into  account, 
a  height  of  over  300  units  is  needed  by  the  CCi  of  von  Neumann's 
design.  While  this  is  a  mere  error  of  calculation,  it  upsets  most  of 
von  Neumann's  later  calculations  concerning  the  size  of  MC  and  the 
delays  through  MC. 

This  error  cannot  be  corrected  simply  by  increasing  the  height  of 
CCi  and  thereby  the  height  of  MC.  The  reason  it  cannot  be  so  cor- 
rected concerns  the  proper  phasing  of  the  periodic  pulsers  PP  and 
triple-return  counters  3>  of  RWE.  Each  PP  should  be  on  for  about 
three  times  the  delay  around  the  loop  Ci  or  the  loop  C2  (see  Table 
II  of  Sec.  4.3.2).  But  there  is  a  delay  within  each  <£  and  between  the 
secondary  input-output  of  each  <i>  and  its  connecting  loop.  Moreover, 
the  PP  of  RWE  are  controlled  from  RWEC.  Hence  a  primary  output 
from  a  <I>  of  RWE  must  go  through  CCi  ,  the  main  channel,  CC2 , 
RWEC,  the  main  channel  again,  and  CCi  again,  all  before  it  can 
turn  off  the  PP  of  RWE.  Altogether,  about  2000  time  units  are  lost 
in  this  way.  Thus,  for  correct  phasing,  the  starting  of  a  PP  of  RWE 
must  be  delayed  about  2000  time  units  over  the  starting  of  its  asso- 
ciated triple-return  counter  <i>.  Some  of  this  delay  is  obtained  in  the 
control  organs  CO  of  RWEC,  but  most  of  it  is  obtained  in  area  W. 
It  will  turn  out  that  area  W  is  not  large  enough  to  give  the  delay  von 
Neumann  needed  for  his  design. 

Von  Neumann's  error  can  be  corrected  by  extending  area  W  to 
the  right.  This  destroys  the  rectangular  shape  of  the  memory  control 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


MC,  however,  and  there  are  a  number  of  ways  of  correcting  the  error 
without  changing  the  size  of  MC.  In  Chapter  5  we  will  redesign  units 
Z  and  W  so  that  their  heights  can  be  reduced  enough  to  allow  CCi 
to  extend  into  the  area  now  occupied  by  Z. 

Von  Neumann  calculated  the  width  of  RWE  and  of  CCi  as  follows. 
The  widest  organ  in  RWE  is  the  pulser  labeled  "0.6,"  which  produces 
a  sequence  with  14  ones  (see  Table  II  of  Sec.  4.3.2).  This  calls  for  a 
width  of  28.  All  other  organs  of  RWE  are  of  width  24  or  less.  Von 
Neumann  added  1  unit  for  the  vertical  channel  from  this  pulser  to 
input  Ui  of  loop  Ci ,  obtaining  a  total  width  of  29  units  for  RWE. 
The  coded  sequences  entering  and  leaving  CCi  contain  5  ones  each; 
hence  the  pulsers  and  decoders  of  CCi  are  each  of  width  10.  Von 
Neumann  added  a  strip  on  each  side  in  accordance  with  the  design 
of  Figure  29.  Hence  CCi  is  12  units  wide.  The  combined  width  of 
Cd  RWE  is  thus  41  units. 

Actually  there  is  a  small  error  here  too.  The  vertical  channel  from 
the  output  of  the  pulser  labeled  "0.6"  would  pass  by,  and  receive 
stimuli  from,  the  confluent  state  in  the  lower  right-hand  corner  of  this 
pulser,  so  that  the  wrong  sequence  would  enter  input  ux  of  loop  Ci  . 
There  are  a  number  of  ways  in  which  this  error  can  be  corrected  so 
that  the  complex  CCi-RWE  can  be  accommodated  within  a  width  of 
41.  The  pulser  can  be  turned  upside  down.  The  pulser  can  be  re- 
designed so  as  to  be  narrower  and  higher.  The  best  way  is  to  redesign 
the  coded  channel,  and  hence  CCi  ,  as  follows. 

Let  us  count  the  number  of  pairwise  distinct  coded  sequences 
needed  for  the  coded  channel  of  MC.  The  outputs  o2 ,  o3 ,  o5  of  CU 
and  the  input  of  CU  pass  through  area  X  and  require  4  coded 
sequences.  It  will  turn  out  that  4  coded  sequences  are  needed  in 
area  Z.  An  examination  of  Figures  39  and  41  shows  that  31  additional 
coded  sequences  are  needed.  Hence  39  pairwise  distinct  coded  se- 
quences are  needed  for  the  coded  channel  of  MC. 

Recall  that  m  is  the  length  of  the  coded  sequence  and  k  is  the  num- 
ber of  ones  it  contains.  As  von  Neumann  correctly  calculated  above, 
his  algorithm  calls  for  m  =  9  and  k  =  5  when  39  sequences  are  needed. 
But  a  better  choice  is  m  =  9  and  k  =  4;  this  gives  56  different  se- 
quences, which  is  more  than  enough.  The  pulsers  and  decoders  for 
k  =  4  are  of  width  8,  a  saving  of  two  units  over  von  Neumann's 
pulsers  and  decoders. 

Von  Neumann  later  used  the  width  of  12  for  CC2  and  CC3  and 
calculated  a  width  of  18  for  RWEC.  He  calculated  a  height  of  545 
for  CC3  ;  lesser  heights  are  required  for  CC2  and  RWEC.  Thus  he 
obtained  a  width  of  42  and  a  height  of  545  for  the  complex  CC2- 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




RWEC-CC3  .  But  for  this  height  of  545  to  obtain,  the  decoders  of 
CC2  cannot  always  be  placed  so  that  their  outputs  feed  directly  into 
the  organs  of  RWEC,  and  the  pulsers  of  CC3  cannot  always  be  placed 
so  that  their  inputs  come  directly  from  the  organs  of  RWEC.  Vertical 
channels  are  needed  for  their  connections.  These  vertical  channels 
can  be  provided  within  the  limits  of  von  Neumann's  dimensions  for 
the  complex  CC2-RWEC-CC3  by  using  decoders  in  CC2  and  pulsers 
in  CC3  which  are  of  width  8,  so  that  CC2  and  CC3  can  each  be  of 
width  10  and  RWEC  can  be  of  width  22. 

Hence  we  modify  von  Neumann's  design  of  the  coded  channel  by 
choosing  m  =  9  and  k  =  4,  i.e.,  coded  sequences  of  length  9  containing 
4  ones.  By  the  rule  of  Section  3.2.1  for  computing  the  size  of  a  pulser, 
the  pulsers  of  this  coded  channel  will  be  of  width  8  and  height  7. 
By  the  rule  of  Section  3.3  for  computing  the  size  of  a  decoder,  the 
decoders  of  this  coded  channel  will  be  of  width  8  and  height  11.  But 
it  turns  out  that  every  decoder  constructed  by  the  algorithm  of 
Section  3.3  has  a  height  of  10.  This  means  that  CCi  can  be  accommo- 
dated within  a  height  of  320  and  a  width  of  10,  including  insulating 
strips  of  unexcitable  states. 

We  thus  end  up  with  the  following  dimensions  for  the  memory 
control  MC  and  its  main  parts  (cf.  Fig.  37): 

MC:      547  cells  high,  87  cells  wide 
RWE:    320  cells  high,  31  cells  wide 
RWEC:  545  cells  high,  22  cells  wide 
CCi  :     320  cells  high,  10  cells  wide 
CC2  :     545  cells  high,  10  cells  wide 
CC3  :     545  cells  high,  10  cells  wide. 
These  figures  presuppose  that  the  design  can  be  completed  without 
enlarging  any  of  the  organs  of  RWE.  This  presupposition  will  be 
confirmed  in  Chapter  5.] 

4.3.4  The  basic  control  organ  CO  in  MC.  We  have  completed  the 
first  task  formulated  at  the  beginning  of  Section  4.3.3:  providing  and 
positioning  the  organs  of  Tables  III  and  IV  in  Section  4.3.2,  and 
of  ^,  i.e.,  of  those  organs  that  are  in  direct  contact  with  U\  ,  Vi ,  Wi ,  u2  , 
V2 ,  W2  (i.e.,  with  Ci  and  C2).  We  can  therefore  now  pass  to  the  second 
task  formulated  there:  controlling  the  organs  referred  to  above,  in 
the  manner  described  in  Figure  38  and  in  Table  II  of  Section  4.3.2. 

It  is  advantageous  to  deal  first  with  a  certain  preliminary  problem, 
before  coming  to  grips  with  the  above  task  in  its  entirety.  This 
preliminary  problem  is  that  of  controlling  the  functioning  of  the  four 
PP  of  Figure  39  according  to  the  requirements  formulated  in  Table 
III  in  Section  4.3.2,  and  in  the  discussion  immediately  preceding  it. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


According  to  these,  each  PP  must  first  be  turned  on  and  then  turned 
off,  so  that  the  delay  between  these  two  events  exceeds  by  a  specified 
amount  the  delay  from  the  stimulus  at  the  input  a  of  a  certain  <£  to 
the  response  at  its  output  b.  Each  PP  is  attached  to  one  of  Ui  ,  Vi  , 
u2 ,  v2 .  Let  us  designate  the  one  of  these  under  consideration  by  u. 
Let  us  also  designate  its<f>  (<l>i  or<£2)  by  l>.  Then  we  have  to  stimulate, 
according  to  the  above,  first  u-a+  and  <l-a,  and  then  let  the  response 
at  $-b  stimulate  u-a^  .  The  delays  of  these  processes  must,  in  addi- 
tion, be  so  adjusted  that  they  produce  together  the  desired  excess 
delay  (of  u-a+  to  u-a^  over  5>a  to  !>•&)  referred  to  above. 

This  control  organ  has  the  symbol  CO. 

[  See  Figure  40,  which  differs  from  von  Neumann's  design  in  four 
respects.  First,  von  Neumann  placed  output  6  above  output  c;  our 
positioning  is  better,  since  the  stimulus  from  b  needs  to  be  delayed 
relative  to  the  stimulus  from  c.  Second,  von  Neumann  omitted  the 
insulating  row  of  U's  under  the  PP  (I);  this  is  needed  since  the  bottom 
row  of  a  PP  (1 )  contains  some  confluent  states.  Third,  von  Neumann's 
CO  had  a  width  of  17,  while  the  CO  of  Figure  40  has  a  width  of  16. 
Fourth,  and  most  important,  von  Neumann  used  his  PP(T)  of  Figure 
17b.  This  is  wrong  for  the  following  reason. 

At  most  one  control  organ  CO  of  RWEC  (Fig.  41)  is  on  at  any 
time;  when  it  is  on  it  has  control  of  RWE.  Now  the  output  from  the 
primary  output  of  a  triple-return  counter  ($i  or  <£2)  of  RWE  (Fig. 
39)  causes  stimuli  to  enter  the  stop  inputs  a_  of  several  CO  of  RWEC. 
As  mentioned  at  the  end  of  Section  3.2.2,  if  von  Neumann's  PP(1) 
of  Figure  17  is  stimulated  at  the  stop  input  a_  when  it  is  inactive,  it 
will  be  damaged.  The  alternate  periodic  pulser  PP(1)  of  Figure  20 
is  not  harmed  under  these  circumstances,  and  therefore  we  have  used 
it  in  CO.] 

There  are  2  different  PP,  but  they  are  attached  to  4  different  u 
(u  determined  the  PP  as  well  as  its  l>;  cf.  Table  III) ;  hence  we  might 
expect  that  we  will  need  4  organs  CO.  However,  these  4  cases  are 
further  subdivided  into  16  sub-cases,  according  to  Tables  II  and  III, 
each  sub-case  corresponding  to  a  0  with  an  asterisk  in  these  tables. 
Indeed,  each  formula  (0.x)  with  an  asterisk  requires  a  different 
follow-up  move  and  sequence  of  moves  according  to  Table  II,  and  a 
different  excess  delay  according  to  Table  III.  (Those  lines  of  Table 
III,  which  happen  to  call  for  the  same  excess  delay,  differ  in  their 
u.)  Consequently  we  need  16  organs  CO,  one  for  each  (0.x)  with 
an  asterisk. 

Consider  now  a  specific  CO,  i.e.,  a  specific  (0.x)  with  an  asterisk. 
The  input  a  is  the  primary  input.  A  stimulus  at  a  should  go  to  u-a+ 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL  24f) 

and  to  3>a;  these  will  therefore  be  connected  to  two  outputs,  to  b 
and  to  c,  respectively.  Note  that  the  u-a+  and  the  <Ja  referred  to 
must  be  thought  of  as  certain  suitable  inputs  of  the  coded  channel, 
while  the  u-a+  and  <&  a  in  Figure  39,  which  are  the  ones  ultimately 
aimed  at,  are  outputs  of  the  coded  channel.  Hence  the  functioning 
of  this  organ,  involving  u-a+  and  l>-a,  will  be  affected  by  the  corre- 
sponding delays  due  to  the  use  of  the  coded  channel.  This  is  equally 
true  for  the  uses  involving  u-a-  and  <i>-6,  which  will  appear  further 
below.  All  these  coded  channel  delays  will  affect,  additively  or  sub- 
tractively,  the  excess  delays  prescribed  in  Table  III.  Hence  precise 
delay  adjustments  will  have  to  be  made  in  CO  to  account  for  these 
things,  and  it  will  be  possible  to  make  a  final  determination  of  these 
only  after  having  effected  the  precise  positioning  of  this  CO  with 
respect  to  the  coded  channel,  and  the  laying  out  and  positioning  of 
the  entire  coded  channel  with  respect  to  RWE.  We  must  therefore, 
for  the  time  being,  leave  these  delay  adjustments  in  a  schematic  and 
adjustable  condition.  We  do  this  by  assigning  an  area  D,  of  as  yet 
unspecified  dimensions,  to  the  delay  path  from  a  to  b  which  will 
become  necessary  for  this  purpose;  this  delay  path  is  indicated  by 
the  symbol  (B. 

We  can  now  go  on  to  the  other  functions  of  CO.  These  are  the 
following.  A  response  stimulus  from  $-b  must  stimulate  w-a_  ,  and 
also  the  follow-up  move  that  Table  II  (and,  more  broadly,  the  general 
scheme  of  Fig.  38)  prescribes  for  this  CO  case  {i.e.,  for  this  0  with  an 
asterisk} . 

It  would  not  do,  however,  to  take  a  connection  directly  from 
!>•&  to  u-a-  and  to  the  input  of  the  followT-up  move.  Indeed,  the  same 
l>-6  corresponds  to  several  (6  for  3>i  and  10  for  $2  ;  cf.  Table  III)  of 
our  CO  cases.  Accordingly,  it  corresponds  to  two  possible  u's  (u2 , 
V2  for  3>i  and  ux  ,  V\  for  <i>2 ;  cf.  Table  III)  and  to  several  possible 
follow-up  moves  (6  or  10,  respectively;  cf.  above).  Hence  our  CO 
must  be  provided  with  a  memory,  to  cause  the  b  stimulus  to  activate 
only  its  (the  CO's)  own  u-a-  and  follow-up  move. 

Actually,  this  is  not  necessary  for  the  u-a-  ;  i.e.,  !>•&  could  be 
tied  to  all  of  Ui  •  a_  ,  v i  •  a_  ,  u2  •  a_  ,  v2  •  a_  .  This  would  merely  turn  off, 
in  addition  to  the  one  PP  which  has  been  previously  turned  on  (by 
u-a+)  and  which  it  is  intended  to  turn  off  now  (because  it  corre- 
sponds to  the  correct  u),  also  the  three  other  PP  which  had  not  been 
previously  turned  on  at  all.  Turning  off  a  PP  [of  Fig.  39]  which  has 
not  been  turned  on  has  no  effects  whatever  [cf.  the  end  of  Sec.  3.2.2.] 

For  the  follow-up  move,  on  the  other  hand,  this  special  control 
of  the  <$>•&  stimulus  is  necessary.  Indeed,  if  this  stimulus  were  per- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


mitted  to  start  all  the  follow-up  moves  corresponding  to  its  l>  (6  or 
10,  respectively;  cf.  above)  together,  this  would  corrupt  the  func- 
tioning of  the  automaton  altogether.  Since  the  special  control  of  the 
$-b  stimulus  is  needed  for  its  effects  on  the  follow-up  moves,  it  is 
simplest  to  apply  that  control  to  the  effects  on  u-a-  also.  We  will  do 
this  in  what  follows. 

This  special  control  (i.e.,  the  coincidence  of  the  fact  that  the 
specific  CO  under  consideration  is  the  one  that  has  been  activated, 
with  the  response  of  l>-6)  requires  a  memory  organ,  as  noted  above, 
and  a  subsequent  coincidence  organ.  The  memory  organ  is,  of  course, 
a  PP(1),  turned  on  from  a  of  CO.  The  PP(1)  then  supplies  con- 
tinuously one  stimulus  to  the  coincidence  organ,  the  C  in  the  lower 
right  corner  of  Figure  40.  When  the  <&-b  response  arrives  (i.e.,  when 
the  input  d  is  stimulated),  then  the  coincidence  organ  receives  its 
other  stimulus.  The  response  of  the  coincidence  organ  then  emits 
stimuli  at  the  outputs  e  and  /.  Output  e  is  connected  to  u  •  a_  ,  while 
output  /  is  connected  to  the  follow-up  move. 

The  input  d  also  clears  the  memory,  i.e.,  turns  the  PP(1)  off. 
[An  examination  of  Figs.  40  and  20  shows  that]  the  turning  off  of 
PP(1 )  comes  too  late  to  interfere  with  the  coincidence-sensing  opera- 
tion. 

The  delay  area  D  is  now  allotted  a  width  of  15,  while  its  height  h 
is  kept  adjustable.  We  will  choose  h  later,  when  the  detailed  laying- 
out  and  adjusting,  referred  to  above,  will  take  place.  The  discussion 
and  determination  of  the  delays  within  CO  must,  of  course,  also  be 
postponed  until  then. 

4.3.5  The  read-write-erase  control  RWEC.5  [See  Fig.  41.]  Let  us 
now  consider  the  general  problem  outlined  at  the  beginning  of  Section 
4.3.4:  controlling  the  organs  that  are  in  direct  contact  with  the  con- 
necting loop  Ci  and  the  timing  loop  C2  (i.e.,  CCi  plus  RWE  of  Fig. 
37),  according  to  Figure  38  and  Table  II  in  Section  4.3.2.  This  will, 
of  course,  be  based  on  the  use  of  the  control  organ  CO  of  Section  4.3.4. 

Figure  38  shows  that  there  is  still  a  memory  requirement  to  be 
satisfied:  the  instructions  "starts  a0"  (line  5)  and  "starts  ai"  (line  6) 
amount  to  this. 

Activities  depending  on  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  instructions 
(marked  "a0  active"  or  "on  active,"  in  lines  9  and  15)  occur  twice  for 
each.  It  is  simplest  to  attach  a  "local"  memory  with  this  function  at 
each  one  of  the  four  points  referred  to.  Hence  we  will  have  to  provide 
four  PP(T)'s  for  this  purpose.  Thus  the  activities  referred  to  above, 

6  [Von  Neumann's  title  was  "The  control-area  in  B.  Overall  dimensions  of 
B."] 


DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 




which  depend  on  a0  or  ax  being  "active"  (lines  9  and  15)  will  be 
derived  from  a  coincidence  organ  (a  C),  which  gets  one  stimulus 
from  the  relevant  PP,  and  the  other  stimulus  from  the  logical  ante- 
cedent of  the  activity  in  question,  according  to  Figure  38. 

Finally,  there  exist  two  orders  "stops  a0"  and  two  orders  "stops 
ai"  (whichever  happened  to  be  active;  cf.  lines  10  and  16);  i.e.,  at 
this  point  the  two  PP  of  a0  or  of  a\  ,  respectively,  must  be  turned  off. 
However,  here  a  deviation  from  Figure  38  is  permissible.  Indeed, 
these  "stop,"  (i.e.,  turn-off)  operations  can  be  delayed  to  the  end 
of  these  sequences  {i.e.,  to  the  points  where  iz  is  stimulated  (lines 
12  and  19)}.  Here  all  four  sequences  meet.  Therefore,  here  all  these 
turn-offs  can  be  effected  by  a  single  stimulus,  which  stops  all  four 
PP's.  In  this  way  not  only  the  two  PP  of  that  one  of  ao ,  a\  which 
was  turned  on  will  now  be  turned  off,  but  also  those  of  the  other  one, 
which  was  not  turned  on  at  all.  The  latter  measure,  however,  is 
harmless;  it  has  no  effects  whatever.  [As  explained  at  the  end  of 
Section  3.2.2,  this  is  so  for  von  Neumann's  general  periodic  pulser 
PP,  but  not  for  his  PP(1)  of  Figure  17b.  Therefore  the  alternate 
PP(T)  of  Figure  20  should  be  used  here.  That  is,  the  four  PP(T)  of 
Figures  41b,  41c,  and  41e  should  be  the  alternate  PP  (1)  of  Figure  20.] 

The  stimulus  to  be  used  for  this  purpose  is  obviously  %  itself. 

Based  on  all  these  considerations,  we  arrive  at  the  assembly  shown 
in  Figure  41. 

The  structure  of  this  figure  is  very  similar  to  that  of  Figure  39. 
The  vertical  dotted  lines  which  border  it  on  both  sides  have  the  same 
role  as  the  single  vertical  dotted  line  in  Figure  39.  As  discussed  in 
Section  4.3.3,  the  latter  indicated  the  portion  of  the  coded  channel 
adjacent  to  the  assembly  of  Figure  39  (i.e.,  CCi ,  which  is  adjacent 
to  RWE  in  Fig.  37).  Similarly  now  the  two  first  mentioned  lines 
indicate  the  portions  of  the  coded  channel  adjacent  to  the  two  edges 
of  our  assembly  in  Figure  41 .  We  will  discuss  the  relationship  of  these 
three  portions  of  the  coded  channel  (CCi  ,  CC2 ,  and  CC3)  further 
below;  it  will  appear  that  they  determine  together  most  of  the  coded 
channel  of  the  memory  control  MC. 

All  inputs  and  outputs  of  the  sub-organs  that  occur  in  Figure  41 
(PP,  CO)  are  properly  indicated.  The  various  inputs  and  outputs 
that  connect  this  assembly  with  the  coded  channel  (i.e.,  with  CC2 
and  CC3)  and  with  the  constructing  unit  CU  are  marked  with  symbols 
that  are  self-explanatory. 

Everything  on  the  CC2  side  of  RWEC  is  an  output  of  CC2  ;  inspec- 
tion shows  that  there  are  33  of  these.  Repeatedly,  there  are  several 
specimens  of  the  same  output  bv  in  positions  that  are  immediately 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


o  -3  cd 

CM  CM  CM  CM 
CO    CO    co  CO 


CO    CO     CO  CO 


CO      CO       CO  CO 


bfl  bC  bfi  bfi 
pH   pt<   *Ph  Ph 


CO  CO  co  co 
I'll 

CO  CO     CO  CO 

CO  CO     CO  CO 


CO      CO       CO  CO 


CO  CO  CO  co 

CO  CO  CO  CO 

I  I  I  I 

CD  c3  o 

CO  CO  CO  CO 

CO  CO  CO  CO 


bfi    bfi    bfi  bC 

ptH     pU,     £  £ 


pL<    pen    fi(  pt, 


bO  ^ 

CO    co  co 

co  co  co 

CP    cJh  b£ 

CO    CO  CO 

CO    CO  CO 


Ph 


3  0 


2  + 

3  * 


CD  CD 

'5s  '5s 



eqi 

+3 

CO 

o9 

1— ( 

O 

+ 

O 

rH 

O 

CD 


CD 

In; 

In, 

IB 
S3 


o  o 

fa 

o  




e 



e 


e 

^> 

+ 

e  cm 

+ 

e  cm 

+ 

e  co 

+ 

©  co 

+ 

?    ?    a  s 

5  5 

5  5 

»  5* 

5  5 

o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


o 


T3 

u 

d 

m  of  d 

d 

u 

cl 

.s 

d 

c3 

u 

c 
H 

.s 


O 

O 

u 

bC 

bott 

top 

zero' 

top 

one" 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

'5 

pd 

CD 

-d 

CD 

-t-3 

-1-3 

bO 

bfi 

bC 

bfl 

bJD 

en 

en 

en 

en 

CD 

DESIGN  OF  A  TAPE  AND  ITS  CONTROL 


fct(      (ii  tti  fin  \n      fn  '(n  jzf 






■+3       -4-3      -4-3     -+^>      -4-3  -4-^ 

g  g  g  g  g  g  8 

I  S"  I £    'M  'M 


s 

■s 

o 
o 


-4-5       ^>  +^ 

g    g    g    g  g 


£ 

■s 


s  • 

0  3 

1  § 

3  3 


5-  » 

I  •§>  *  2 

I -3  ill 

nit 

£  5  ^  3 


£  ,  i  . 

^    I    a    s    ^    I  a 


4  4  4  4 
s     s    §  k 

5  3  »  » 


ft  ^? 

S  I    a  a 


O 



u 






6  5 










si 

.s 




o 


o 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


adjacent  to  each  other.  (In  one  case  two  neighboring  in  one 

case  four  neighboring  and  in  five  cases  two  neighboring  <i>2-6.) 
In  each  one  of  these  cases  it  would  have  been  possible  to  replace  the 
complex  of  neighboring  bv's  by  a  single  bv ,  thus  shortening  (i.e., 
reducing  the  height  of)  the  CC2  side.  However,  the  height  of  the  CC2 
side  is  even  so  not  controlling  (cf.  further  below);  hence  there  is  no 
advantage  in  reducing  it.  On  the  other  hand,  a  merger  of  &„'s  would 
necessitate  the  introduction  of  vertical  distribution  channels  in  the 
assembly  to  the  right  of  CC2  (leading  to  the  various  sub-organs  CO 
that  these  bv ,  i.e.,  these  <i>i-6  and  <i>2-6,  feed),  and  thereby  the  width 
of  the  assembly  would  be  effectively  increased. 

Everything  on  the  CC3  side  is  an  input  of  CC3  ;  inspection  shows 
that  there  are  68  of  these. 

In  addition  to  these  there  are  two  inputs,  0\  and  o4 ,  and  two  out- 
puts, i\  and  i2 ,  on  the  top  side  of  Figure  41. 

The  portions  CC2  and  CC3  of  the  coded  channel  that  we  have  now 
introduced  have  as  inputs  av  and  outputs  bv  (always  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  coded  channel,  i.e.,  of  CC2  or  CC3)  all  those  that 
occurred  on  CCi  (in  Fig.  39),  and  in  addition  the  following  new  ones: 
/3,  i3  (these  occur  as  both  inputs  and  outputs),  o2 ,  o3 ,  o6  (these  occur 
as  outputs  only).  Thus  the  30  distinct  v  that  were  required  for  CCi 
(cf.  Sec.  4.3.3)  are  augmented  by  another  5.  This  ties  into  our  discus- 
sion of  formulas  (32')  and  (33').  It  means  that  we  have  so  far  n  ^  35. 
(There  will  be  yet  another  increase  of  n\  cf .  later. ) 

[  In  the  remainder  of  this  section  von  Neumann  calculated  the 
dimensions  of  CC2 ,  RWEC,  and  CC3  ;  see  the  end  of  Section  4.3.3 
for  a  discussion  of  his  results. 

We  add  Table  V,  which  collates  the  information  in  von  Neumann's 
Figures  32-36,  39,  and  41  and  Tables  II-IV.  Table  V  shows  how  the 
control  organs  of  RWEC  control  the  pulsers  and  periodic  pulsers  of 
RWE] 


Chapter  5 


AUTOMATA    SELF- REPRODUCTION 


5.1  Completion  of  the  Memory  Control  MC 

[5.1  J  The  rest  of  the  manuscript.  Von  Neumann's  manuscript 
continues  for  six  further  sections  and  then  abruptly  terminates. 
These  sections  are  devoted  mainly  to  detailed  calculations  of  the 
delays  within  the  memory  control  MC.  Most  of  these  delay  calcu- 
lations are  wrong,  owing  to  the  errors  von  Neumann  made  in  design- 
ing and  calculating  the  sizes  of  various  organs  and  units  in  Chapter  3. 
For  this  reason  we  will  not  reproduce  the  balance  of  the  manuscript 
but  will  summarize  it  instead.  The  omitted  portion  of  the  manuscript 
is  of  about  the  length  of  Chapter  3  and  contains  7  figures. 

The  organization  and  operation  of  the  memory  control  MC  is 
summarized  in  Section  4.3.1  and  Figure  37.  The  status  of  von  Neu- 
mann's design  of  MC  at  the  end  of  Chapter  4  is  as  follows. 

Read-write-erase  unit  RWE:  The  pulsers,  periodic  pulsers,  triple- 
return  counters,  and  discriminator  that  constitute  RWE  have  been 
designed  and  their  order  in  RWE  has  been  decided;  see  Figure  39. 
The  exact  positions  of  these  organs  in  RWE  have  not  been  decided 
upon,  but  each  is  to  be  so  placed  that  it  is  fed  nearly  directly  by  a 
decoder  of  CCi  and/or  it  feeds  a  pulser  of  CCi  nearly  directly.  RWE 
is  to  be  320  cells  high  and  31  cells  wide.  There  is  a  wide  range  of  choice 
for  the  position  of  exit  w2  of  the  timing  loop  C2 .  Von  Neumann  placed 
it  48  cells  above  the  bottom  of  RWE. 

Read-write-erase-control  unit  RWEC:  RWEC  is  mainly  composed 
of  control  organs  CO;  these  have  been  designed  except  for  specifying 
the  size  of  delay  area  D  and  the  design  of  the  delay  path  (B  (Fig.  40). 
The  16  CO's  and  the  4  PP(T)'s  are  arranged  as  in  Figure  41.  The 
exact  positions  of  these  organs  in  RWEC  have  not  been  decided 
upon,  but  each  organ  is  to  be  placed  so  as  to  satisfy  as  nearly  as 
possible  the  principle  that  a  decoder  of  CC2  feeds  it  directly  and  it 
feeds  a  pulser  of  CC3  directly.  RWEC  is  to  be  545  cells  high  and  22 
cells  wide. 

Coded  channel:  RWEC  and  RWE  are  to  be  positioned  as  in  Figure 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


37.  The  coded  channel  consists  of  CC3 ,  X,  Z,  Cd  ,  CC2 ,  and  the 
main  channel.  The  main  channel  extends  from  the  solid  dot  near 
the  bottom  middle  of  Figure  37  to  the  solid  square  in  the  upper  left- 
hand  corner  of  the  same  figure — more  specifically,  the  main  channel 
ends  where  it  feeds  the  topmost  pulser  of  CC2 .  The  code  to  be  used 
in  the  coded  channel  has  the  following  characteristics.  Each  coded 
sequence  will  begin  with  a  one,  will  contain  exactly  three  other  ones, 
and  will  be  of  length  9  or  less.  This  code  allows  for  56  different  se- 
quences; it  will  be  confirmed  later  that  less  than  this  number  of  se- 
quences is  required.  These  sequences  have  not  yet  been  assigned  to 
the  inputs  and  outputs  of  the  coded  channel.  The  pulsers  of  the  coded 
channel  will  be  of  width  8  and  height  7,  and  the  decoders  of  width 
8  and  height  10.  Cd  is  to  be  of  width  10  and  height  320.  CC2  and 
CC3  are  each  to  be  of  width  10  and  height  545. 

The  memory  control  MC  will  be  547  cells  high  and  87  cells  wide, 
assuming  that  the  undesigned  organs  and  units  can  be  accommo- 
dated in  this  space. 

We  will  now  summarize  what  von  Neumann  accomplished  in  the 
part  of  the  manuscript  we  are  not  publishing.  He  first  combined  the 
read-write-erase  unit  RWE  and  its  control  RWEC  as  in  Figure  37. 
An  examination  of  Section  4.3.3  and  Figure  39  shows  that  informa- 
tion flows  in  both  directions  through  CCi  ,  so  that  CCi  contains  both 
decoders  and  pulsers.  An  examination  of  Section  4,3.5  and  Figure  41 
shows  that  RWEC  receives  information  only  from  CC2  and  trans- 
mits information  only  to  CC3  .  Consequently,  CC2  contains  only 
decoders  and  CC3  contains  only  pulsers.  Hence,  the  non-cyclic  coded 
channel  of  Figure  28k  is  adequate.  This  confirms  that  the  coded 
channel  of  Figure  37  is  indeed  adequate.  Otherwise,  the  cyclic  channel 
of  Figure  30  would  be  needed.  If  this  were  so,  the  coded  sequences  of 
the  main  channel  of  Figure  37  would  have  to  be  recoded  when  they 
reached  the  end  of  the  main  channel  and  then  transmitted  to  the 
beginning  of  the  main  channel,  as  is  done  in  Figure  27. 

The  area  X  was  designed  next.  The  outputs  o2  ,  o3  ,  and  ob  from  the 
constructing  unit  CU  pass  through  direct  transmission  channels  in 
Y,  enter  pulsers  in  X,  enter  the  main  channel  of  MC  as  coded  se- 
quences, and  pass  through  CC2  into  RWEC.  A  completion  signal 
destined  for  input  %  of  CU  leaves  RWEC  at  any  one  of  the  three 
exits  shown  in  Figure  37,  is  coded  in  CC3 ,  enters  the  main  channel,  is 
decoded  in  X,  and  passes  through  Y  to  the  exit  labeled  c%".  Area  X 
thus  contains  three  pulsers  and  one  decoder,  and  is  of  height  36  and 
width  10.  Von  Neumann  made  area  Y  the  same  height  as  area  X, 
and  area  Z  the  same  width  as  area  X,  thus  specifying  the  dimensions 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




of  areas  Y,  Z,  and  W.  The  actual  design  of  area  Y  is  left  until  later, 
but  it  is  very  simple.  Area  Y  contains  four  communication  lines 
composed  of  ordinary  transmission  states;  the  rest  of  Y  is  unused. 
We  thus  have  the  following  dimensions : 

Area  X:  36  cells  high,  10  cells  wide 
Area  Y:  36  cells  high,  31  cells  wide 
Area  Z:  191  cells  high,  10  cells  wide 
Area  W:  191  cells  high,  31  cells  wide. 

Von  Neumann  next  considered  the  delays  that  are  needed  within 
MC  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  corruption  by  interference  among 
the  messages  which  circulate  in  this  system.  These  fall  into  two 
classes:  those  needed  to  prevent  corruption  in  the  main  channel 
and  those  needed  to  prevent  corruption  within  RWE  and  RWEC. 
Von  Neumann  applied  the  rule  (16' )  of  Section  3.6.1  and  concluded 
that  no  corruption  would  occur.  This  conclusion  is  not  correct,  how- 
ever. 

Consider  the  pulses  from  outputs  e  and  /  of  the  control  organ  CO 
(Figs.  40  and  41).  The  pulse  from  e  enters  CC3  and  thereby  causes 
a  coded  sequence  to  enter  the  main  channel;  this  coded  sequence  is 
decoded  in  CCi  and  causes  a  periodic  pulser  of  RWE  to  stop.  The 
pulse  from  /  usually  enters  CC3  and  produces  a  coded  sequence  which 
eventually  starts  a  pulser  of  RWE.  The  pulse  from  /  also  usually 
enters  the  top  qf  the  next  control  organ  CO,  exits  from  c  (among 
other  things),  and  enters  CC3  ;  this  pulse  eventually  starts  a  triple- 
return  counter  of  RWE.  Hence  the  pulses  coming  from  e  and  /  of  a 
CO  normally  cause  three  coded  sequences  to  enter  the  main  channel 
in  close  succession:  the  first  sequence  stops  a  periodic  pulser  of  RWE, 
the  second  sequence  starts  a  pulser  of  RWE,  and  the  third  sequence 
starts  a  triple-return  counter  of  RWE.  For  some  CO  these  sequences 
would  overlap  in  the  main  channel  if  they  were  not  properly  delayed 
by  means  of  delay  paths  between  RWEC  and  CC3  .  There  is  ample 
room  for  these  delay  paths  in  RWEC. 

A  similar  problem  arises  in  RWE.  Consider  the  input  ux  which 
feeds  the  connecting  loop  Ci  .  The  input  ux  is  fed  by  both  pulsers  and 
periodic  pulsers,  and  when  loop  Ci  is  being  lengthened  or  shortened,  a 
sequence  of  pulses  from  a  pulser  follows  immediately  after  a  sequence 
of  pulses  from  a  periodic  pulser.  These  sequences  must  not  overlap. 
Similar  remarks  apply  to  input  V\  of  loop  Ci  and  inputs  u2  and  v2  of 
loop  C2  (see  Sec.  4.2  and  Table  II  of  Sec.  4.3.2).  This  undesirable 
overlap  of  sequences  can  be  prevented  by  adding  delays  in  RWE  or 
by  changing  the  order  of  the  periodic  pulsers  and  pulsers  in  RWE. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


These  oversights  are  minor.  A  more  important  case  of  interference 
arises  in  the  main  channel  when  the  periodic  pulsers  and  triple-return 
counters  of  RWE  are  being  used  to  lengthen  or  shorten  the  connecting 
loops  Ci  and  C2  .  When  the  upper  half  of  each  loop  is  very  roughly 
200  cells  long,  a  periodic  pulser  PP  of  RWE  is  started  at  about  the 
same  time  as  a  triple-return  counter  ($1  or  <£2)  emits  an  output  pulse 
from  its  primary  output  b  (Fig.  23).  The  coded  sequence  which  starts 
the  PP  and  the  coded  sequence  coming  from  the  decoder  fed  by  <f>i 
or  $2  will  overlap  in  the  main  channel,  causing  contamination.  A 
full  explanation  of  this  interference  problem,  and  its  solution,  will 
be  given  in  Section  5.1.2. 

The  proper  performance  of  the  activities  controlled  by  each  of  the 
16  organs  CO  depends  upon  the  observance  of  certain  precisely  speci- 
fied delays,  each  one  of  these  delays  being  specific  to  the  particular 
CO  involved.  Each  CO  controls  a  lengthening  or  shortening  operation 
on  one  of  the  connecting  loops  Ci  or  C2 ,  and  this  is  timed  by  means 
of  the  other  connecting  loop  and  a  triple-return  counter.  We  will  illus- 
trate this  point  by  discussing  the  delays  associated  with  control 
organ  C03  ;  see  Table  V  and  Figures  39  and  41a. 

The  PP  (110110)  of  RWE  which  has  inputs  ui-a+  and  Ui-a-  must 
be  turned  on  for  approximately  6n  units  of  time,  where  xn  is  the 
square  of  L  under  scan  at  the  beginning  of  the  process.  The  quantity 
6n  is  unbounded  and  hence  cannot  be  stored  in  the  finite  automaton 
MC.  In  Section  4.1.7  von  Neumann  introduced  the  timing  loop  C2 
to  store  the  quantity  2n.  A  pulse  takes  approximately  6n  time  steps 
to  travel  around  loop  C2  three  times;  the  delay  is  not  precisely  Qn 
because  the  loop  C2  is  lengthened  or  shortened  before  the  loop  Ci  is 
lengthened  or  shortened.  These  three  circuits  around  C2  are  counted 
by  the  triple-return  counter  <£2  .  Clearly,  the  control  interactions 
between  C03 ,  on  the  one  hand,  and  PP  (110110)  and  <£2  on  the  other, 
take  considerable  time  because  RWEC  is  remote  from  RWE.  Similar 
remarks  apply  to  the  other  CO's  of  RWEC. 

We  will  enumerate  the  delays  included  in  this  control  process, 
measuring  them  from  the  output  of  the  confluent  state  in  the  upper 
right-hand  corner  of  C03  . 

(Ai)  Starting  from  output  c  of  C03 ,  the  delay  through  CC3 ,  the 
main  channel,  and  CCi  ,  ending  at  input  3>2-a  of  RWE. 

(A2)  The  delay  within  <i>2 ,  the  delay  between  $>2  and  input  v2  of  C2 
(this  is  52');  the  delay  between  output  w2  of  C2  and  <£2  (this 
is  b" ) ;  and  the  delay  within  C2 .  Remember  that  a  pulse  goes 
around  C2  three  times.  The  total  delay  is  3  (52  +  52  )  +  a2  plus 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




the  desired  delay  from  the  turning  on  to  the  turning  off  of 
PP(llOllO);  see  Table  III  of  Section  4.3.2. 

(A3)  Starting  from  output  <£2-&  of  RWE,  the  delay  through  CQ  ,  the 
main  channel,  and  CC2  ;  the  delay  from  d  to  e  of  C03  ;  and  the 
delay  through  CC3 ,  the  main  channel,  and  CCi  ,  ending  with 
input  Ui'd-  of  RWE.  This  is  approximately  a  complete  loop 
around  the  memory  control  MC. 

(A4)  The  delay  through  area  D  (along  delay  path  <B)  of  C03  ;  the 
delay  from  output  b  of  C03  through  CC3  and  the  main  channel 
to  area  Z;  the  delay  through  Z,  W,  and  Z  again;  and  the  delay 
through  the  main  channel  and  CCi  to  input  Ui-a+  of  RWE.  The 
exact  amount  of  the  delay  along  (B  and  in  Z  and  W  has  not  been 
specified  yet. 

The  memory  control  MC  is  547  cells  high  and  87  cells  wide,  and  so 
the  delay  around  its  main  channel  is  considerable.  It  is  clear  that 
PP (110110)  must  be  started  much  later  than  <£2  because  of  the  excess 
delay  3  (82'  +  82" )  +  o>2  plus  the  delay  from  the  output  of  <£2  around 
the  coded  channel  of  MC,  through  RWEC,  and  back  down  the  coded 
channel  to  the  stop  input  Ui»o_  of  PP  (110110).  Hence  the  delays  in 
area  D  (path  (B)  of  C03  and  the  delays  in  areas  Z  and  W  are  indeed 
necessary.  Similar  delays  are  needed  for  the  other  control  organs 
CO,  but  the  exact  amount  of  delay  needed  varies  with  each  CO, 
because  the  positions  of  the  CO's  in  RWEC  and  the  positions  of  the 
PPs  and  *'s  in  RWE  all  vary. 

Von  Neumann  made  a  lengthy  and  detailed  calculation  of  the 
amount  of  delay  needed  in  areas  D,  Z,  and  W  for  each  CO.  These 
calculations  are  exceedingly  long  and  complicated  because  of  the 
nature  of  von  Neumann's  design  procedure.  He  had  not  yet  specified 
the  details  of  the  design  of  MC:  the  size  of  area  D  of  CO  had  not  been 
fixed  and  the  paths  (B  in  the  control  organs  COi  through  COi6  had 
not  been  specified ;  the  exact  code  of  the  coded  channel  had  not  been 
chosen;  and  the  exact  locations  of  the  organs  of  CC2 ,  RWEC,  Z, 
W,  and  RWE  had  not  been  specified.  In  particular,  the  height  of 
RWE  was  determined  by  the  height  of  CCi  ,  and  there  is  in  fact 
much  vacant  space  in  RWE. 

Von  Neumann  made  his  delay  calculations  with  all  these  design 
parameters  unspecified,  and  then  specified  these  parameters  on  the 
basis  of  the  results  of  his  calculations.  This  is  a  very  flexible  design 
procedure,  but  it  makes  the  calculations  tedious  and  involved. 
Moreover,  some  of  the  dimensions  von  Neumann  used  at  this  point 
were  wrong,  notably  the  height  of  CCi  ;  see  the  end  of  Section  4.3.3. 
These  errors  vitiate  most  of  his  delay  calculations.  For  these  reasons 


25()  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

we  will  not  reproduce  this  part  of  the  manuscript.  Instead,  we  will 
summarize  his  chief  results.  These  results  show  that  von  Neumann's 
design  of  the  memory  control  MC  does  work,  after  certain  modifica- 
tions are  made  in  it. 

The  delays  involved  depend  on  design  details  which  are  not  yet 
fixed,  and  on  design  parameters  which  must  be  altered  to  correct  for 
von  Neumann's  design  errors.  For  these  reasons  we  will  give  only 
very  rough  estimates  of  these  delays.  The  delay  3  (52'  +  52A ')  +  a2  ]H 
very  roughly  000  units.  The  delay  A3  from  <J>2  •  b  of  R WE  through  C03 
and  back  to  Ui-a,-  of  RWE  is  very  roughly  1200  units.  Note  that 
according  to  von  Neumann's  calculation  of  the  height  of  RWE  (239 
units— cf.  Sec.  4.3.3),  the  upper  PP (TToilO)  is  about  200  units 
above  <£2  .  The  extra  delay  needed  in  areas  D,  Z,  and  W  turns  out  to 
be  very  roughly  2000  units.  The  variation  in  delay  from  one  CO  to 
another  is  no  more  than  about  100  units. 

The  common  part  of  the  extra  delay  associated  with  each  periodic 
pulser  of  RWE  (i.e.,  about  2000  units  of  delay)  wTill  be  taken  care  of 
in  areas  Z  and  W.  The  part  of  the  extra  delay  unique  to  each  CO 
(i.e.,  about  100  units  of  delay)  will  be  taken  care  of  in  the  delay  area  D 
of  that  CO.  At  the  end  of  Section  4.3.4  area  D  was  allotted  width  15, 
while  its  height  h  was  left  adjustable.  The  height  of  RWEC  was 
controlled  by  the  height  of  CC3 ,  which  is  545.  A  height  of  545  for 
RWEC  permits  h  =  21,  so  h  is  chosen  to  have  this  value.  This  gives 
D  of  CO  an  area  of  21  X  15,  or  315  cells,  which  is  more  than  enough 
to  accommodate  that  part  of  the  extra  delay  which  is  unique  to  each 
CO. 

Von  Neumann  now  proceeds  to  design  the  areas  Z  and  W.  He  di- 
vides W  into  four  equal  areas  Wi  ,  W2 ,  W3  ,  and  W4 ,  plus  a  slight 
excess.  He  divides  Z  into  the  corresponding  parts  Zi  ,  Z2 ,  Z3 ,  and 
Z4  .  Areas  Zi  and  Wx  are  used  to  get  the  extra  delay  associated  with 
the  upper  PP  (110110)  of  RWE,  areas  Z2  and  W2  are  used  to  get 
the  extra  delay  needed  for  the  upper  PP  (110000)  of  RWE,  and  so 
forth  for  the  other  periodic  pulsers  of  RWE.   

Take  C03  as  an  example  again.  C03  controls  the  upper  PP  (110110) 
of  RWE,  starting  it  at  input  ux-a+  (Figs.  39  and  41a).  In  the  design 
of  Section  4.3.5,  the  start  pulse  leaves  C03  at  Ui-a+  ,  is  coded  in  CC3  , 
travels  through  the  main  channel,  is  decoded  at  CCi  ,  and  enters 
RWE  at  input  ux  •  a+  .  This  design  is  to  be  modified  now  so  as  to  add 
about  2000  units  of  delay  to  the  path  from  C03  to  RWE;  this  extra 
delay  is  achieved  by  running  the  path  through  the  areas  Zi  and  Wi  . 
To  make  this  path  pass  through  areas  Zi  and  Wi  ,  we  code  the  output 
Ui-a+  of  C03  into  a  new  coded  sequence  Ui*-a+  ,  place  a  decoder  for 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




Ui*-a+  in  Zi  ,  place  a  pulser  for  Ui-a+  in  Zi  ,  and  connect  the  output 
of  the  decoder  to  the  input  of  the  pulser  by  a  long  path  which  travels 
through  Wi  . 

The  delay  path  A4  from  C03  to  input  Ui-a+  of  RWE  is  now  as 
follows.  A  pulse  leaves  the  confluent  element  at  the  upper  right-hand 
corner  of  C03  and  travels  along  path  (B,  exiting  at  Ui*-a+  ,  which  is 
labeled  Ui-a+  in  Figure  41a.  A  pulser  of  CC3  sends  a  coded  sequence 
corresponding  to  Ui  -a+  into  the  mam  channel  j  a  decoder  in  Zi 
detects  this  sequence  and  sends  a  pulse  through  a  long  path  in  area 
Wi  .  This  pulse  stimulates  a  pulser  in  Zi  which  sends  a  coded  sequence 
corresponding  to  Ui-a+  into  the  main  channel.  Finally,  a  decoder 
in  CCi  detects  this  sequence  and  sends  a  pulse  into  the  start  input 
a+  of  the  upper  PP(llOllO)  of  RWE. 

Since  control  organs  C05 ,  C07 ,  COi3  ,  and  COi5  also  control  the 
upper  PP(llOllO)  of  RWE,  their  outputs  Ux-a+  should  also  be 
changed  to  Ui*-a+  ,  and  the  pulsers  which  they  stimulate  in  CC3 
should  be  changed  accordingly. 

Similar  arrangements  should  be  made  for  the  other  CO's  of  RWEC 
and  the  other  parts  of  Z  and  W,  so  that  a  pulse  from  an  output  b 
of  CO  will  pass  through  areas  Z  and  W  before  starting  a  periodic 
pulser  of  RWE.  For  these  arrangements  coded  sequences  correspond- 
ing to  u2*-a+  ,  Us*-a+  ,  and  ih*-a+  are  used. 

In  short,  the  following  modifications  are  to  be  made  in  the  design 
of  MC  as  it  was  left  at  the  end  of  Chapter  4.  The  labels  Ut-a+  , 
Vi-a+  ,  u2-a+  ,  and  v2-a+  of  Figure  41  are  to  be  replaced  by  the  labels 
^i*-a+  ,  Vi*-a+  ,  u2*-a+  ,  and  v2*-a+  ,  respectively,  and  the  pulsers  of 
CC3  recoded  accordingly.  Area  Zi  has  a  decoder  for  Ui*-a+  and  a 
pulser  for  Ui*a+,  the  output  from  the  decoder  feeding  the  pulser 
through  a  long  delay  path  in  area  Wi  .  Area  Z2  has  a  decoder  for 
^i*-a+  and  a  pulser  for  Vi-a+  ,  the  former  feeding  the  latter  through 
area  W2  .  Similarly,  a  decoder  for  u2*-a+  in  Z3  feeds  a  pulser  for  u2-a+ 
via  W3 ,  and  a  decoder  for  v2*-a+  in  Z4  feeds  a  pulser  for  v2-a+  via 
W4. 

It  will  be  recalled  that  von  Neumann  made  an  error  in  calculating 
the  height  of  CCi  ;  see  the  end  of  Section  4.3.3.  Because  of  this  error 
he  thought  that  Wi  ,  W2 ,  W3 ,  and  W4  could  each  be  of  height  68. 
Their  widths  were  to  be  29,  giving  each  an  area  of  1972  cells.  He 
planned  to  attain  the  needed  delay  by  running  a  path  of  ordinary 
transmission  states  back  and  forth  through  each  area.  He  thus  ex- 
pected to  obtain  a  delay  of  1972  units  of  time,  which  is  slightly  more 
than  he  needed.  Moreover,  as  he  observed,  additional  delays  could  be 
obtained  in  the  areas  D  of  the  CO's.  However,  because  of  his  error 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


in  calculating  the  height  of  CCi  ,  the  areas  Wi  ,  W2 ,  W3  ,  and  W4  can 
be  of  height  45  at  most,  which  does  not  give  enough  delay. 

There  are  a  number  of  ways  this  error  can  be  corrected.  The  area 
W  can  be  extended  to  the  right.  The  organs  of  MC  can  be  rearranged 
to  take  advantage  of  the  unused  space  in  X,  Y,  Z,  RWE,  and  CC2  . 
But  there  are  two  more  elegant  ways  of  making  the  correction. 

In  the  first  place,  each  of  the  areas  Wi  ,  W2 ,  W3 ,  and  W4  can  be 
designed  to  give  more  than  1  unit  of  delay  per  cell.  Since  confluent 
states  do  not  feed  one  another,  they  can  be  alternated  with  ordinary 
transmission  states  to  give  an  average  delay  of  \\  units  per  cell.  An 
even  larger  delay  per  cell  can  be  obtained  by  counting  processes; 
we  will  indicate  one  way  in  which  this  can  be  done.  The  repeater  of 
Figure  18e  (Sec.  3.2.2)  will  by  itself  give  a  periodic  sequence  of  the 
form  100-  •  -00.  Let  the  pulse  to  be  delayed  in  area  Wi  start  two  of 
these  repeaters,  one  producing  a  sequence  of  length  41  and  the  other 
a  sequence  of  length  47,  the  numbers  41  and  47  being  relatively  prime. 
Feed  the  output  from  both  repeaters  to  a  confluent  state.  After  41  X 
47  (=  1927)  units  of  time  there  will  be  a  coincidence  at  this  confluent 
state.  The  resultant  output  pulse  from  the  confluent  state  signals  a 
delay  of  1927  units,  and  this  pulse  can  be  used  to  turn  off  the  two 
repeaters.  In  this  way  the  delay  of  roughly  2000  units  which  von 
Neumann  needs  can  be  obtained  in  area  Wi  ,  and  similarly  for  areas 
W2 ,  W3 ,  and  W4  . 

Another  way  of  getting  the  needed  delays  in  the  area  W  that  von 
Neumann  actually  had  available  is  to  replace  the  four  delay  paths 
of  area  W  by  a  single  path.  To  do  this,  break  the  connections  from 
the  main  channel  to  the  decoders  of  Z,  and  connect  each  decoder  of 
Z  directly  to  the  pulser  of  Z  which  it  formerly  drove  via  a  delay  path 
in  W.  For  example,  the  output  from  the  decoder  for  Ui*-a+  will  now 
go  directly  into  the  pulser  for  Ui-a+  ;  see  how  D (11001)  feeds 
P  (10011)  at  the  top  of  the  coded  channel  of  Figure  27.  Then  make  a 
branch  of  the  main  channel  which  passes  through  the  top  of  Z, 
goes  through  W  to  give  a  delay  of  about  2000  units  in  W,  and  then 
feeds  the  four  decoders  of  Z. 

The  design  of  areas  Z  and  W  adds  4  new  coded  sequences  to  the 
coded  channel,  those  symbolized  by  Ui* -a+  ,  Vi*-a+  ,  u2*-a+  ,  and 
v2* ' -a+  .  There  are  30  coded  sequences  associated  with  the  decoders 
and  pulsers  of  CCi  and  4  coded  sequences  associated  with  the  de- 
coders and  pulsers  of  X.  A  coded  sequence  is  associated  with  the  out- 
put 13  of  COh  ;  otherwise  CC2  and  CC3  do  not  add  any  sequences  to 
the  list  already  given.  Thus  the  coded  channel  of  the  memory  control 
MC  needs  39  different  coded  sequences.  At  the  end  of  Section  4.3.3 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




we  tentatively  assumed  that  a  code  with  sequences  of  length  9  con- 
taining four  ones,  which  allows  56  different  sequences,  would  be 
adequate.  This  assumption  is  now  confirmed. 

This  completes  von  Neumann's  design  of  the  memory  control  MC. 
The  exact  code  of  the  coded  channel  has  not  been  selected,  and  the 
exact  positions  of  many  of  the  organs  of  MC  have  not  been  chosen, 
but  these  are  minor  matters  of  detail. 

Von  Neumann  concluded  the  manuscript  by  calculating  the  dura- 
tion of  the  operations  of  the  memory  control  MC.  Equation  (17')  of 
Section  4.1.3  specifies  n  as  the  number  of  the  square  xn  of  the  linear 
array  L  which  is  under  scan  at  a  given  step  s.  Von  Neumann  found 
the  total  time  for  lengthening  to  be  approximately  36ns  +  13,000, 
and  the  total  time  for  shortening  to  be  approximately  48ns  +  20,000. 

5.1 .2  Solution  of  the  interference  problem.  The  design  of  the  memory 
control  MC  is  now  complete  and  workable  except  for  the  interference 
problem  left  unsolved  in  Section  5.1.1.  In  the  present  subsection  we 
will  explain  this  problem  and  give  methods  for  solving  it. 

The  problem  involves  the  read-write-erase  control  RWEC  and  the 
read -writ e-erase  unit  RWE.  In  certain  circumstances,  a  signal  from 
RWEC  to  RWE  interferes  with  a  signal  from  RWE  to  RWEC  in 
the  main  channel. 

Von  Neumann  used  n  to  represent  the  number  of  the  square  xn  of 
the  linear  array  L  which  is  under  scan  at  a  given  step  s.  For  certain 
values  of  n%  a  coded  sequence  used  to  start  a  periodic  pulser  of  RWE 
will  overlap  a  coded  sequence  coming  from  CCi  to  instruct  RWEC  to 
stop  that  same  periodic  pulser.  This  overlap  will  occur  in  the  main 
channel  between  CCi  and  the  end.  In  some  cases  this  overlap  will 
produce  corruption  by  interference;  see  formula  (16')  of  Section  3.6.1. 
The  two  overlapping  sequences  will  form  a  third  sequence  which  will 
stimulate  a  decoder  of  CC2  that  should  not  be  stimulated  at  this 
point  in  the  operation  of  MC. 

This  interference  problem  involves  all  of  the  periodic  pulsers  and 
triple-return  counters  of  RWE,  but  for  the  sake  of  concreteness  we 
will  explain  it  in  terms  of  the  upper  periodic  pulser  PP(llOllO)  of 
RWE  and  the  triple-return  counter  <£2  used  in  timing  it.  Consider 
first  the  operation  of  PP (110110).  It  is  started  with  a  pulse  into  its 
input  U\'d+  at  some  time  r+  and  stopped  with  a  pulse  into  its  input 
Ui-a,-  at  some  time  r_  ,  where  r+  <  r_  .  Table  V  shows  that  r_  —  r+ 
equals  approximately  Qn.  Hence  the  time  of  the  start  at  U\  •  a+  is  given 

by 


(l) 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Consider  next  the  control  of  the  stop  at  U\  •  a_  .  This  is  controlled 
by  the  pulse  from  the  primary  output  <£2-6  of  the  triple-return  counter 
$2  at  some  time  n  .  This  pulse  must  travel  from  <£2-6  through  CCi  , 
the  main  channel,  CC2 ,  some  control  organ  of  RWEC  (e.g.,  C03), 
the  main  channel  again,  and  CCi  again,  to  stimulate  U\-a_ 
and  thereby  stop  PP  (1101 10).  The  time  required  for  this  transit  is 
the  delay  A3  of  Section  5.1.1,  and  is  very  roughly  1200  units.  Hence 
the  time  of  the  exit  from  <f>2-fr  of  RWE  is  very  roughly 

(2)  rb  =  r_  -  1200. 

Now  compare  equations  (1)  and  (2),  keeping  in  mind  that  n  is 
the  number  of  the  square  of  L  under  scan.  For  n  =  0,  r+  is  about  1200 
units  larger  (later)  than  rb  .  For  large  n%  r+  is  very  much  smaller 
(earlier)  than  rb .  And  for  ns  equal  to  about  200,  the  times  r+  and 
rb  are  equal.  Hence  when  ns  equals  approximately  200,  the  coded 
sequence  Ui-a+  will  be  in  the  main  channel  near  CCi  at  about  the 
same  time  the  coded  sequence  $>2  •  b  enters  this  part  of  the  main  chan- 
nel. The  result  will  be  corruption  by  interference  in  the  coded  channel. 

Hence  von  Neumann's  design  of  MC  does  not  work  correctly 
when  the  loops  Ci  and  C2  are  of  certain  lengths.  We  will  give  two 
different  solutions  to  this  interference  problem.  The  first  consists  in 
avoiding  the  interference  by  never  using  those  cells  of  L  where  it 
arises.  This  may  be  done  by  programming  MC  in  such  a  way  that  no 
value  of  n  less  than,  say,  250  is  used.  The  cells  xo ,  X\ ,  •  •  •  ,  x24g  of 
L  will  then  never  be  used.  This  implies  that  when  MC  begins  life, 
loop  Ci  will  pass  through  cell  x25o  and  loop  C2  has  a  corresponding 
length.  And  this  in  turn  affects  the  arrangements  for  universal  con- 
struction, as  we  shall  now  see. 

Von  Neumann's  arrangements  for  universal  construction  are  as 
follows  (Sees.  1.5.2  and  1.7.2.1).  Enclose  the  secondary  automaton  to 
be  constructed  in  a  rectangular  area  of  side  lengths  a  and  ($.  The  de- 
sired state  of  each  cell  (i,  j)  (i  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  a.  —  1;  j  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  , 
iS  —  1)  of  this  rectangular  area  is  represented  by  Xty .  The  construc- 
tion process  will  leave  an  arbitrary  cell  (i,  j)  in  any  1  of  the  10  unex- 
cited  states  U,  Tua0  {u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  and  C0o  (see  Figs.  9  and 
10),  and  so  is  limited  to  10  values.  The  desired  construction  is 
described  to  the  primary  (parent)  automaton  by  giving  it  the  se- 
quence AoO  ,  Ad  >  *  *  *  >  Xo(0-1)  j  XlO  ,  *  *  *  ,  Xt;  ,  *  *  *  ,  X(a_i)  (/S_i)  . 

The  secondary  automaton  to  be  constructed  will  in  general  have 
an  indefinitely  extendible  linear  array  L  and  a  memory  control  MC 
to  control  it.  This  being  so,  von  Neumann  designed  MC  so  that  it 
would  be  rectangular.  Now  on  this  first  solution  of  the  interference 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




problem,  MC  must  be  constructed  so  that  initially  loop  Ci  will  pass 
through  cell  x25o  and  loop  C2  has  a  corresponding  length.  To  keep  the 
rectangular  shape  of  MC,  we  extend  the  boundary  of  MC  250  cells 
to  the  right,  making  MC  337  cells  wide  and  547  cells  high  (see  Fig. 
37 ) .  All  but  about  1  per  cent  of  the  cells  in  the  added  area  will  always 
be  in  the  unexcitable  state  U,  which  means  that  this  new  area  is 
being  used  very  inefficiently. 

Hence  while  this  first  solution  to  the  interference  problem  is  worka- 
ble, it  is  most  inelegant,  and  von  Neumann  would  not  have  been 
satisfied  with  it.  For  this  reason  we  will  suggest  a  second  solution.  This 
solution  is  also  of  general  interest  because  it  illustrates  some  funda- 
mental features  of  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure. 

Von  Neumann's  cellular  structure  consists  of  an  infinite  iterated 
array  of  the  same  29 -state  finite  automaton.  Any  finite  number  of 
these  automata  can  be  active  at  a  given  time;  therefore  the  cellular 
structure  is  capable  of  an  indefinitely  large  amount  of  concurrent 
action  or  parallel  data  processing.  In  his  design  of  the  self -reproducing 
automaton,  von  Neumann  was  not  taking  advantage  of  the  parallel 
data  processing  capability  of  his  cellular  structure.  Rather,  he  was 
designing  the  self -reproducing  automaton  so  that  for  the  most  part 
it  would  do  only  one  thing  at  a  time.  In  this  respect,  von  Neumann's 
logical  design  of  the  self -reproducing  automaton  is  similar  to  his 
logical  design  of  the  ED  VAC  (see  pp.  10-11  above).  Moreover,  when 
he  did  use  parallel  activity  in  the  lengthening  and  shortening  of  loops 
Ci  and  C2 ,  he  ran  into  timing  problems.  He  needed  the  delay  area 
D  of  each  CO  (Fig.  40)  and  the  delay  area  W  of  MC  (Fig.  37)  to 
postpone  the  start  of  a  periodic  pulser  of  RWE,  and  in  arranging 
for  the  stop  of  this  periodic  pulser  he  ran  into  the  interference  prob- 
lem we  are  now  discussing. 

This  interference  problem  would  not  arise  if  two  signal  paths 
(wires)  could  be  crossed  without  intersecting;  so  let  us  look  at  the 
possibilities  for  wire-crossing  in  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure 
and  variations  of  it.  Wires  could  cross  naturally  without  touching 
in  a  3-dimensional  cellular  structure,  but  von  Neumann  wanted  to 
construct  a  self -reproducing  automaton  in  2  dimensions  (Sec.  1.3.3.3). 
Keeping  to  his  2-dimensional  structure,  he  could  have  incorporated  a 
crossing  primitive  into  each  cell.  For  example,  his  29-state  automaton 
could  be  augmented  by  a  new  primitive  consisting  of  Too*  and  Toi«/ 
together,  so  that  information  could  flow  through  a  cell  from  left  to 
right  and  from  bottom  to  top  simultaneously.1  Von  Neumann  did  not 

1  Cellular  structures  which  have  crossing  primitives  are  considered 
in  Church,  "Application  of  Recursive  Arithmetic  to  the  Problem  of  Circuit 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


say  why  he  didn't  include  a  crossing  primitive  among  the  states  of 
his  basic  automaton,  but  it  was  probably  because  he  wished  to  keep 
the  number  of  states  small. 

It  is  actually  possible  to  synthesize  a  crossing  organ  in  von  Neu- 
mann's cellular  structure.  Such  an  organ  is  shown  in  Figure  42a.2 
The  symbolism  of  this  and  subsequent  figures  is  somewhat  different 
from  von  Neumann's  symbolism.  A  single  arrow  is  used  to  represent 
an  ordinary  transmission  state;  later  a  double  arrow  will  be  used  to 
represent  a  special  transmission  state.  A  dot  besides  an  arrow  in- 
dicates that  the  cell  is  initially  active,  i.e.,  is  excited  at  time  t  =  0. 
Figure  42b  gives  the  initial  state  of  each  of  the  five  "clocks"  of  the 
crossing  organ  in  von  Neumann's  notation. 

Consider  first  the  behavior  of  the  crossing  organ  when  the  inputs 
ai  and  a2  are  000  •  •  •  .  The  clocks  send  alternate  zeros  and  ones  into 
both  inputs  of  each  of  the  six  confluent  states  C3,  C6,  F3,  F6,  El ,  and 
H5.  The  phasing  of  the  ones  (i.e.,  pulses)  as  they  enter  these  con- 
fluent cells  is  indicated  in  Figure  42a  by  dashed  and  dotted  lines.  A 
dashed  line  signifies  a  one  (pulse)  at  every  even  time  (t  ^  4)  and  a 
dotted  line  signifies  a  one  (pulse)  at  every  odd  time  (t  ^  3).  It  is 
clear  from  Figure  42a  that  the  two  sequences  arriving  at  a  confluent 
state  are  out  of  phase.  The  function  of  these  clock  sequences  is  to 
gate  the  sequences  coming  into  a\  and  a4  so  that  they  can  cross  each 
other. 

The  sequence  i0 ,  ii  ,  i2  ,  is  ,  u  ,  H  ,  •  *  ■  entering  a\  is  split  into  two 
sequences  by  the  confluent  cell  A4-  The  clocks  insert  ones  into 
every  even  position  of  the  upper  sequence  and  into  every  odd  position 
of  the  lower  sequence.  The  odd  bits  — ,  % ,  — ,  iz ,  — ,  % ,  •  •  •  are 
allowed  by  the  gating  pulses  to  pass  along  row  3  and  out  at  b\  ,  while 
the  even  bits  i0 ,  — ,  i2 ,  — ,  u  ,  — ,  •  •  ■  are  allowed  by  the  gating  pulses 
to  pass  along  rowT  6  and  out  at  b\  .  Similarly,  the  sequence  jo ,  ji  ,  j2  , 
jz  yji,jh,  *  *  *  entering  a2  is  split,  with  the  even  bits  jo ,  — ,  j2 ,  — , 
j ;4  ,  — ,  •  •  •  traveling  up  column  C  and  the  odd  bits  — ,  ji  ,  — ,  jz  , 
— ,  j5 ,  •  •  •  traveling  up  column  F.  The  phasing  of  the  whole  system 
is  such  that  the  sequence  jo ,  — ,  j2 ,  — ,  j*  ,  — ,  •  •  •  is  interleaved  with 
io ,  — ,  i2 ,  — ,  u  ,  — ,  •  •  •  at  cell  C6  and  with  — ,  i\  ,  — ,  iz  ,  — ,  i$ ,  •  •  • 
at  cell  C3.  Likewise,  the  sequence  — ,  ji ,  — ,  j3 ,  — ,  j$ ,  •  •  •  is  inter- 


Synthesis."  Cellular  structures  which  have  crossing  primitives  and  also  per- 
mit the  construction  of  zero-delay  paths  of  unbounded  (but  finite)  length  are 
discussed  in  Burks,  "Computation,  Behavior,  and  Structure  in  Fixed  and 
Growing  Automata,"  Holland,  "A  Universal  Computer  Capable  of  Executing 
an  Arbitrary  Number  of  Sub-Programs  Simultaneously,"  and  Holland,  "Itera- 
tive Circuit  Computers." 

2  The  crossing  organ  of  Figure  42  was  designed  by  J.  E.  Gorman. 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




leaved  with  i0 ,  — ,  i2 ,  — ,  u  ,  — ,  •  •  •  at  cell  F6  and  with  — ,  ix  ,  — , 
ia  ,  — ,  %  ,  •  •  •  at  cell  F3.  For  example,  the  sequences  entering  and 
leaving  cell  C6  are: 


The  sequences  from  cells  C3  and  F3  are  combined  in  cell  El  to  give 
the  output  jo ,  ji ,  j'2 ,  •  •  •  delayed  15  units  of  time.  Similarly,  the 
sequences  from  cells  F3  and  F6  are  combined  in  cell  H5  to  give  the 
output  to ,  ii ,  i2 ,  •  •  •  delayed  15  units  of  time.  In  this  way  informa- 
tion passes  from  a\  to  6i  and  from  a2  to  62  without  any  cross  inter- 
ference. 

We  shall  now  employ  the  crossing  organ  to  solve  the  interference 
problem  in  von  Neumann's  design  of  the  memory  control  MC.  The 
interference  occurs  when  n  is  very  roughly  200.  Under  this  condi- 
tion, a  coded  sequence  U\  •  a+  ,  v\  •  a+  ,  u2  •  a+  ,  or  v2  •  a+  which  is  to  start 
a  periodic  pulser  of  RWE  interferes  with  a  coded  sequence  <i>2*6  or 
$i-6  which  should  eventually  (via  RWEC)  stop  this  same  periodic 
pulser.  By  means  of  the  crossing  organ  the  signal  <J>2-b  can  be  sent 
directly  from  <f>2  to  stop  an  upper  periodic  pulser  of  RWE  and  can 
then  be  sent  into  the  coded  channel  to  signal  RWEC  that  this  phase 
of  the  lengthening  or  shortening  of  loop  Ci  is  finished.  Likewise,  the 
signal  can  be  sent  directly  from  $i  to  stop  a  lower  periodic  pulser 
of  RWE  and  thence  into  the  coded  channel.  This  modification  of 
von  Neumann's  design  greatly  reduces  the  amount  of  delay  needed 
in  the  delay  areas  D  (of  a  CO)  and  W  (of  MC). 

The  simplest  way  to  arrange  for  a  direct  stop  of  a  periodic  pulser 
by  a  triple-return  counter  is  this. 

(1)  In  Figure  39a,  exchange  the  pulser  labeled  "0.0"  with 
PP  (110000),  and  invert  PP  (TlOllO).  The  stop  inputs  of  both  peri- 
odic pulsers  can  now  be  connected;  call  the  point  of  connection 
Ui-Vi'd-  .  Similarly,  in  Figure  39b  exchange  the  pulser  labeled  "0.4" 
with  PP (110000)  and  invert  PP(110110);  call  the  common  stop 
input  of  these  two  periodic  pulsers  u2  •  v2  •  a_  . 

(2)  Replace  the  single  column  of  U  states  located  between  the 
upward  and  downward  portions  of  the  main  channel  near  the  center 
of  MC  by  12  columns  of  cells.  This  room  will  be  used  for  the  channels 
and  crossing  organs  of  (3)  and  (4)  below. 

(3 )  Then  take  the  primary  output  b  of  <f>i  across  the  main  channel 
(by  means  of  a  crossing  organ),  down,  back  across  the  main  channel 
(by  means  of  a  second  crossing  organ),  into  u2-v2-a-  ,  and  also  into 


From  the  left : 
From  below : 
Output : 


0  0  10  1  to  I  4  1  U  •  •  • 

o  o  o  i  jo  i  h  i  U  1  •  •  • 

0  0  0  0  0  0  jo  io  j2  i2  j4  U  "  - 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


a  pulser  of  CCi  (which  will  signal  the  appropriate  CO  of  RWEC 
that  this  phase  of  the  lengthening  or  shortening  of  loop  C2  is  finished ) . 

(4)  Finally,  take  the  primary  output  b  of  $>2  across  the  main  channel 
(by  means  of  a  third  crossing  organ),  up  and  outside  of  the  channel 
of  (3),  back  across  the  main  channel  (by  means  of  a  fourth  crossing 
organ),  into  Ui-Vi-a,-,  and  also  into  a  pulser  of  CCi  (which  will 
signal  the  appropriate  CO  of  RWEC  that  this  phase  of  the  lengthen- 
ing or  shortening  of  loop  Ci  is  finished). 

These  arrangements  take  only  four  crossing  organs  and  considera- 
bly reduce  the  delay  circuitry  of  von  Neumann's  design.  But  they 
raise  a  problem  concerning  the  construction  of  the  memory  control 
MC,  and  hence  of  the  construction  of  any  secondary  automaton  which 
contains  an  indefinitely  extendible  linear  array  L.  The  construction 
process  von  Neumann  envisaged  has  two  stages  (cf.  Sees.  1.5.2  and 
1.7.2.1).  First,  the  primary  (constructing)  automaton  puts  each 
cell  of  the  secondary  area  in  1  of  the  10  unexcited  (quiescent)  states 
U,  Twa0  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  and  Coo  (see  Figs.  9  and  10).  Von 
Neumann  called  the  result  of  this  process  the  initial  state  of  the  second- 
ary automaton.  Second,  the  primary  automaton  stimulates  the  sec- 
ondary automaton  at  an  appropriate  point  on  its  periphery,  so  that 
the  secondary  may  begin  its  intended  activity.  Von  Neumann  called 
this  starting  signal  the  secondary  automaton's  starting  stimulus. 

Thus  the  secondary  automata  von  Neumann  wished  to  have  con- 
structed by  the  primary  constructing  automaton  (i.e.,  from  within 
his  cellular  structure)  are  all  of  a  special  kind:  each  cell  of  the  second- 
ary is  initially  in  1  of  the  10  quiescent  states  U,  TMa0  (u  =  0,  1 ;  a  = 
0,  1,  2,  3),  and  C0o  ;  and  the  automaton  may  be  started  by  a  stimulus 
on  its  periphery.  With  this  in  mind,  we  define  an  initially  quiescent 
automaton  to  be  a  finite  area  of  von  Neumann's  29 -state  cellular 
structure  every  cell  of  which  is  in  1  of  the  10  quiescent  states  U, 
TMao  ,  and  Coo  • 

Since  the  crossing  organ  contains  excited  ordinary  transmission 
states  and  excited  confluent  states,  any  automaton  containing  it  is 
not  initially  quiescent.  Consequently,  the  design  of  the  memory 
control  MC  must  be  further  modified  so  that  MC  will  contain  no 
excited  cells  initially,  but  that  before  it  is  used  MC  will  contain  the 
four  crossing  organs  described  above. 

The  following  procedure  will  work.  Further  enlarge  the  area  in  the 
center  of  MC  to  allow  for  the  four  constructing  devices  and  four  de- 
coders described  below.  Modify  each  of  the  four  crossing  organs  of 
MC  as  follows:  replace  each  active  state  (Ton  ,  Cio ,  C0i)  of  Figure  42 
by  the  corresponding  passive  state  (Toio ,  C0o ,  Coo),  and  delete  cells 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 


A5,  B5,  C5  (replace  them  by  U's)  to  make  the  center  clock  accessible 
from  the  outside.  Then  provide,  for  each  modified  crossing  organ,  a 
special-purpose  constructing  device  and  a  decoder  to  start  it.  The 
constructing  device  will  employ  the  general  procedure  for  modifying 
a  remote  cell  which  was  described  on  p.  155  and  illustrated  in  Figure 
14;  by  means  of  this  procedure  it  can  start  the  five  clocks  of  the  cross- 
ing organ  in  phase  and  rebuild  cells  A5,  B5,  and  C5.  The  constructing 
device  itself  will  be  started  by  the  decoder  on  signal  from  the  main 
channel. 

Now  arrange  for  the  secondary  automaton's  starting  stimulus  to 
put  a  (new)  coded  sequence  into  the  main  channel  of  MC.  This 
sequence  will  be  sensed  by  each  of  the  four  decoders,  which  will  in 
turn  start  the  four  constructing  devices.  Each  constructing  device 
will  send  a  constructing  arm  to  its  crossing  organ,  start  each  of  the 
five  clocks  of  the  crossing  organ  in  proper  phase,  rebuild  cells  A5,  B5, 
C5  of  Figure  42,  and  leave  the  neighborhood  of  the  crossing  organ 
in  the  proper  state.  The  memory  control  MC  is  then  ready  to  operate, 
and  the  secondary  automaton  containing  it  can  proceed  in  its  normal 
way. 

This  completes  the  second  solution  of  the  interference  problem  in 
von  Neumann's  design  of  the  memory  control  MC.  Neither  solution 
is  ideal:  the  first  solution  is  inelegant,  and  the  second  solution  is 
rather  complicated.  A  radically  different  and  much  better  approach  to 
the  design  of  MC  will  be  suggested  in  Section  5.2.2.  However,  the 
inelegance  or  complexity  of  the  final  design  of  MC  is  not  directly 
relevant  to  von  Neumann's  central  purpose.  Von  Neumann  was 
seeking  an  existence  proof  of  self -reproduction,  that  is,  a  proof  that 
self -reproduction  is  possible  in  his  cellular  structure  (Sec.  1.1.2.1). 
The  construction  of  the  memory  control  MC  is  a  step  towards  this 
proof,  and  for  this  purpose  it  suffices  that  there  exists  a  workable  MC. 

Let  us  summarize  the  results  which  have  been  achieved  so  far. 
The  unlimited  linear  array  L  together  with  its  control  MC  is  a  tape 
unit  with  an  unlimited  memory  capacity.  It  may  be  constructed 
(embedded)  in  the  29-state  cellular  structure  as  an  initially  quiescent 
automaton.  Hence,  an  initially  quiescent  automaton  which  performs 
the  junctions  of  a  tape  unit  with  unlimited  memory  capacity  can  be 
embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure. 

5.1.3  Logical  universality  of  the  cellular  structure.  Let  us  next  re- 
view briefly  how  von  Neumann  planned  to  use  a  tape  unit  with  un- 
limited memory  capacity  in  his  cellular  structure. 

He  discussed  Turing's  universal  automaton  in  the  Second  Lecture 
of  Part  I  of  the  present  work.  Early  in  Part  II  he  stated  the  five  main 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


questions  considered  in  this  part:  (A)  Logical  universality:  can  any 
single  automaton  perform  all  the  logical  operations  which  are  per- 
formable  with  finite  (but  arbitrarily  extensive)  means?  (B)  Con- 
structibility:  can  automata  be  constructed  by  other  automata?  (C) 
Construction  universality:  can  any  single  automaton  construct  every 
other  automaton?  (D)  Self -reproduction:  can  any  automaton  con- 
struct copies  of  itself?  (E)  Evolution:  can  the  construction  of  automata 
by  automata  progress  from  simple  automata  to  increasingly  com- 
plicated automata?  Von  Neumann  stated  that  Turing  had  answered 
the  first  question.  That  is,  Turing's  universal  computing  automaton 
(machine)  is  logically  universal.  Von  Neumann  then  promised  to 
establish  affirmative  answers  to  questions  (B)-(D). 

In  discussing  general  construction  schemes,  von  Neumann  intro- 
duced the  unlimited  memory  array  L  and  its  "ancillary  observation, 
exploration,  and  construction  facilities"  (Sec.  1.4.2.3).  The  latter  is 
the  memory  control  MC,  the  design  of  which  we  have  just  completed 
(Sec.  5.1.2).  Let  us  call  the  complex  L  +  MC  a  "tape  unit."  In 
Section  1.4.2.2  von  Neumann  stated  in  effect  that  this  tape  unit  can 
be  used  as  the  unlimited  memory  of  a  constructing  automaton,  in 
Section  1.5  he  indicated  how  to  use  it  as  the  unlimited  memory  of  a 
universal  constructing  automaton,  and  in  Section  1.6  he  indicated 
how  to  use  a  universal  constructing  automaton  to  obtain  self-repro- 
duction.  We  will  show  in  Sections  5.2  and  5.3  how  these  results  may 
be  achieved. 

In  Section  1.4.2.3  von  Neumann  stated  that  the  tape  unit  can  be 
used  as  unlimited  memory  of  a  logically  universal  automaton  or 
universal  Turing  machine.  Earlier,  in  the  Second  Lecture  of  Part  I 
above,  he  explained  how  a  universal  Turing  machine  works.  And  in 
Sections  4.1.3  and  4.1.4  he  outlined  how  the  constructing  unit  CU 
can  operate  the  tape  unit  MC  +  L.  Putting  all  these  ideas  together, 
we  will  show  how  to  design  a  universal  Turing  machine  in  von  Neu- 
mann^ cellular  structure. 

A  Turing  machine  has  two  main  parts:  a  tape  unit  with  an  indefinite 
memory  capacity,  and  a  finite  automaton  which  can  interact  with 
this  tape  unit.  As  outlined  in  Sections  4.1.3  and  4.1.4  above,  a  con- 
structing automaton  has  two  corresponding  parts:  a  tape  unit  MC  + 
L  and  a  constructing  unit  CU  which  directs  the  construction  of  a 
secondary  automaton  on  the  basis  of  the  information  stored  in  L. 
Thus  CU  is  a  finite  automaton  which  interacts  with  the  tape  unit 
and  also  performs  the  function  of  construction.  Hence  our  task  is  to 
adapt  von  Neumann's  outline  for  the  interaction  of  CU  and  MC  +  L 
to  cover  the  operation  of  a  Turing  machine. 


AUTOMATA  SELF-KEPKODUCTION 


A  finite  automaton  FA  has  a  finite  number  of  states  a  =  1,  •  •  •  ,  a. 
The  automaton  FA  and  the  tape  unit  MC  +  L  operate  in  a  succession 
of  steps  0,  1,  2,  3,  •  •  •  ,  s,  s  +  1,  •  •  •  .  Let  the  state  of  FA  at  step 
number  zero  be  state  number  one,  let  xns  be  the  cell  of  L  under  scan 
at  the  beginning  of  step  s,  and  let  £n«  (=  0,  1)  represent  the  content 
of  xn»  at  this  time.  The  finite  automaton  FA  is  then  defined  by  three 
functions  A,  X,  and  E: 

The  function  A  specifies  the  next  state  as+1  as  a  function  of 
present  state  a  and  the  contents  of  xn»  at  the  beginning 
of  step  s:  as+1  =  A  (a, 

The  function  X  specifies  the  number  to  be  written  in  xn* 
as  a  function  of  a  and  £n*  ,  or  equivalently,  as  a  function 
ofa'+1:&1  =  X(as+1). 

The  function  E  specifies  the  value  of  the  lengthening-short- 
ening parameter  es+1  as  a  function  of  as+1:  es+1  =  E{as+l). 
The  ranges  of  arguments  and  function  values  are : 
a  and  as+1  range  over  the  finite  automaton  states  1,2,  •  •  •  ,  a; 
£n«  and       range  over  0  (representing  "0"  on  xn)  and  1  (representing 
"1"  on  xn); 

es+1  ranges  over  +1  (lengthening)  and  —1  (shortening). 

An  "initially  quiescent  automaton"  is  one  in  which  every  cell  is 
initially  in  1  of  the  10  quiescent  states  U,  TMa0 ,  and  C0o  (Sec.  5.1.2). 
We  will  show  next  how  to  embed  any  given  finite  automaton  FA 
in  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure,  that  is,  how  to  construct  an 
initially  quiescent  automaton  which  will  simulate  FA. 

Each  of  the  a  states  of  FA  will  be  represented  by  a  copy  of  the  state 
organ  SO  of  Figure  43.  The  periodic  pulsers  PP(1)  of  this  figure  are 
the  alternate  periodic  pulsers  of  Figure  20,  which  can  be  turned  off 
without  harm  even  when  they  have  not  been  turned  on.  These  PP  (1 ) 
are  not  shown  to  scale  in  Figure  43;  each  is  actually  13  cells  long  and 

4  cells  high.  As  in  Figure  42,  single  arrows  are  used  to  represent 
ordinary  transmission  states. 

The  finite  automaton  FA  consists  of  a  copies  of  SO  interconnected 
by  means  of  a  coded  channel  (Sec.  3.6  and  Fig.  27).  The  specific 
interconnections  within  an  FA  are  determined  by  its  three  functions 
A,  X,  and  E.  Within  FA,  control  is  shifted  from  one  state  organ  SOa 
to  another  state  organ  SO«'  in  accordance  with  the  information  FA 
receives  from  MC.  The  automata  FA  and  MC  are  interconnected 
by  eight  channels.  The  inputs  ii  ,  i2 ,  i$  of  FA  come  from  the  outputs 
of  MC  which  are  so  labeled  (Fig.  37) ;  the  outputs  oi ,  02 ,  o3 ,  o4 ,  and 

05  of  FA  go  to  the  inputs  of  MC  which  are  so  labeled. 

The  relation  of  the  SO's  of  FA  to  the  coded  channel  of  FA  is  very 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


much  the  same  as  the  relation  of  the  CO's  of  MC  to  the  coded  channel 

of  MC  (Fig.  37). 

We  will  explain  how  the  composite  FA  +  (MC  +  L)  operates. 

At  the  beginning  of  step  s  the  following  conditions  obtain: 

(la)  A  stimulus  is  arriving  at  input  %  of  FA,  signifying  that  step 
.9—1  has  been  completed  and  it  is  time  to  begin  step  s. 

(lb)  Cell  xn»  of  L  is  under  scan;  i.e.,  MC  is  connected  to  xn»  via 
the  connecting  loop  Ci .  The  contents  of  the  cell  xn»  are  desig- 
nated to  be       (=  0,  1). 

(lc)  FA  is  in  state  a;  i.e.,  the  state  organ  SOa«  of  FA  is  in  control. 
More  specifically,  the  upper  PP(1)  of  Figure  43  is  active.  This 
periodic  pulser  has  been  on  (active)  while  loops  Ci  and  C2 
of  Figure  37  were  being  shortened  or  lengthened  at  the  end  of 
step  s  —  1. 

The  reading  process  is  now  inaugurated  and  control  is  shifted  to 
the  lower  PP(T)  of  SOa*  : 

(2a)  The  pulse  entering  input  %  of  FA  goes  via  the  coded  channel 
to  the  input  b  of  each  SO  of  FA.  It  affects  only  SOa«  ,  turning 
off  its  upper  PP(1),  and  passing  through  the  confluent  state 
turned  on  by  this  PP(1)  to  exit  from  outputs  j  and  k. 

(2b)  The  stimulus  from  exit  j  goes  via  the  coded  channel  of  FA  to 
output  Oi  of  FA,  and  thence  to  input  Oi  of  MC,  where  it  starts 
the  process  of  reading  cell  xn8  of  L. 

(2c)  The  stimulus  from  exit  k  of  SOa«  goes  via  the  coded  channel  of 
FA  to  input  /  of  this  same  SO«»  ,  where  it  starts  the  lower 
PP(T).  This  PP(I)  will  be  active  while  cell  xn*  is  being  read 
by  MC. 

The  tape  unit  MC  +  L  then  reads  the  contents  of  cell  xn»  and 
sends  the  result  to  FA : 

If    £n«  =  0  (i.e.,  xns  stores  a  "zero")>  then  a  stimulus  goes 

from  output  ix  of  MC  to  input  ii  of  FA. 
If    £n«  =  1  (i.e.,  xns  stores  a  "one")>  then  a  stimulus  goes 
from  output  i2  of  MC  to  input  i2  of  FA. 
We  state  next  how  these  signals  affect  FA,  using  brackets  to  indi- 
cate the  effects  of  £n«  =  0  and  braces  to  indicate  the  effects  of      =  1. 
(3a)  The  [input  ii]  {input  i2]  goes  via  the  coded  channel  of  FA  to 
enter  [input  d]  {inputs  e  and  g)  of  every  SO.  These  signals 
affect  only  SOa«  . 
(3b)  The  pulse  from  [ii]  {i2}  turns  off  the  lower  PP(l)  of  SOa«  . 
(3c)  The  pulse  from  [ii]  [i^]  into  [d]  {g}  is  passed  by  the  [upper] 
{lower}  confluent  state  which  is  turned  on  by  the  output  of  the 
lower  PP(1),  and  exits  from  outputs  [Z,  m,  n]  {p,  q,  r} . 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




The  pulses  from  [Z,  m,  n]  {/>,  g,  r}  will  determine  the  next  state  of 
FA,  what  is  to  be  written  in  xns  ,  and  whether  loops  Q  and  C2  are  to 
be  lengthened  or  shortened. 

The  specific  connections  of  these  outputs  Z,  m,  n,  p,  q,  and  r  are 
determined  by  the  three  functions  A,  X,  and  E  which  characterize 
the  given  finite  automaton  FA.  For  each  state  organ  SO««  (a  = 
1,2,  •  •  •  ,  a),  these  connections  are  made  as  follows: 
(4a)  The  pulse  from  [I]  {p}  goes  via  the  coded  channel  of  FA  to 

input  c  of  SO«*+i  ,  where  as+1  =  A  (a8,  £n*)- 
(4b)  The  pulse  from  [m]  {q}  goes  via  the  coded  channel  and  outputs 

of  FA  to: 

input  o2  of  MC  if  £„s+1  =  0  (i.e.,  "0"  is  to  be  written  in  xn«)> 
input  o3  of  MC  if  £ns+1  =  1  (i.e.,  "1"  is  to  be  written  in  xn*), 
where  £ns+1  =  X(as+1). 
(4c)  The  pulse  from  [n]  {r}  goes  via  the  coded  channel  and  outputs 
of  FA  to: 

input  04  of  MC  if  es+l  =  1  (i.e.,  loops  Ci  and  C2  are  to  be 
lengthened), 

input  ob  of  MC  if  es+1  =  —1  (i.e.,  loops  Ci  and  C2  are  to 

be  shortened), 

where  e^1  =  E(a8+1). 
This  completes  our  construction  of  an  arbitrary  finite  automaton 
FA  in  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure,  except  for  specifying  the 
state  for  step  s  =  0.  This  state  was  stipulated  to  be  state  number  one 
and  hence  is  represented  by  the  state  organ  SOi  .  If  the  confluent 
cell  in  the  upper  right-hand  corner  of  SOi  were  initially  in  the  state 
Cio ,  starting  pulses  would  emerge  from  exits  j  and  k  of  SOi  .  These 
pulses  would  stimulate  pulsers  of  the  coded  channel  which  in  turn 
would  inject  coded  sequences  yj  and  yk  into  the  main  channel,  and 
FA  would  then  operate  as  described  above.  However,  such  a  device 
would  not  be  an  initially  quiescent  automaton,  for  its  initial  state 
would  contain  one  cell  in  a  state  other  than  U,  Twao ,  and  Coo .  To 
make  FA  initially  quiescent,  we  merely  arrange  for  its  starting 
stimulus  to  stimulate  pulsers  of  the  coded  channel  which  will  also 
inject  the  coded  sequences  yj  and  yu  into  the  main  channel  of  FA. 

This  concludes  our  demonstration  that  an  arbitrary  finite  auto- 
maton can  be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure  as  an 
initially  quiescent  automaton.  We  saw  at  the  end  of  Section  5.1.2 
that  a  tape  unit  with  unlimited  memory  capacity  can  be  embedded 
in  this  cellular  structure  as  an  initially  quiescent  automaton.  Hence 
any  arbitrary  Turing  machine  can  be  embedded  as  an  initially 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


quiescent  automaton,  and  a  fortiori  a  universal  Turing  machine  can 
be  embedded  as  an  initially  quiescent  automaton. 

It  should  be  noted  that  all  these  embedded  devices  will  operate 
slowly  with  respect  to  the  temporal  reference  frame  of  the  cellular 
structure.  This  temporal  reference  frame  consists  of  the  discrete  time 
steps  t  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  ,  and  the  fundamental  operations  of  the  29-state 
automata  of  the  cells  take  place  in  this  reference  frame  (Sees.  1.2.1 
and  1.3.3.5).  The  finite  automata  and  Turing  machines  which  are 
embedded  in  the  cellular  structure  operate  in  this  temporal  reference 
frame  too,  but  the  succession  of  steps  s  =  0,  1,  2,  •  •  •  takes  place 
more  slowly.  In  general,  each  of  the  steps  s  takes  several  time  units 
t.  In  the  case  of  a  tape  unit  MC  +  L,  the  steps  s  take  longer  and 
longer  as  the  loops  Ci  and  C2  get  longer  and  longer. 

Finite  automata  and  Turing  machines  are  usually  regarded  as 
devices  which  accomplish  one  step  s  in  one  unit  of  time  t.  In  other 
words,  s  =  t,  and  the  machines  perform  their  computations  in  "real 
time."  The  initially  quiescent  automata  of  von  Neumann's  cellular 
structure  which  simulate  finite  automata  and  Turing  machines  do 
not  operate  at  the  same  rate  as  the  devices  they  simulate,  but  they 
compute  the  same  results.3 

Von  Neumann's  main  aim  was  to  achieve  construction,  construc- 
tion universality,  and  self -reproduction  in  his  29-state  infinite  cellular 
structure  (Sec.  1.1.2.1).  Let  us  summarize  what  has  been  accom- 
plished so  far,  and  how  it  bears  on  his  main  aim. 

We  have  shown  how  to  embed  in  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular 
structure  an  initially  quiescent  automaton  which  performs  the  computa- 
tions of  a  universal  Turing  machine.  Hence  this  cellular  structure  is 
logically  universal. 

In  planning  his  universal  constructing  automaton,  von  Neumann 
was  guided  by  the  parallel  notion  of  a  universal  computing  machine. 
His  universal  constructing  automaton  will  operate  like  a  universal 
computing  machine,  the  chief  difference  being  that  the  output  of  the 
computing  machine  is  a  computation,  while  the  output  of  the  con- 
structing automaton  is  a  sequence  of  signals  which  constructs  an 
initially  quiescent  secondary  automaton.  A  universal  computing 
machine  Mu  is  a  complex  FA  +  (MC  +  L)  with  this  property: 

3  The  real  time  performance  of  an  automaton  is  usually  called  its  "behavior" 
and  is  to  be  contrasted  with  the  computed  answer  or  "computation"  of  an 
automaton.  For  a  discussion  of  behavior  and  computation  in  finite  and  infinite 
systems  see  Burks,  "Toward  a  Theory  of  Automata  Based  on  More  Realistic 
Primitive  Elements,"  McNaughton,  "On  Nets  Made  up  of  Badly  Timed 
Elements,"  and  Holland,  "Universal  Embedding  Spaces  for  Automata." 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




for  each  Turing  machine  M,  there  is  a  coded  description  C£>'(M ) 
such  that,  when  £)'(M)  is  stored  on  L,  Mu  will  simulate  M,  that  is, 
Mu  will  compute  the  same  result  that  M  computes.  Analogously,  the 
universal  constructor  Mc  is  a  complex  CU  +  (MC  +  L)  with  this 
property:  for  each  initially  quiescent  secondary  automaton  M,  there 
is  a  coded  description  £)(M)  such  that,  when  3D(M)  is  stored  on  L, 
Mc  will  construct  M.4 

Thus  the  essential  step  remaining  in  von  Neumann's  program  to 
achieve  construction,  construction  universality,  and  self -reproduction 
in  his  cellular  structure  is  to  design  the  construction  unit  CU. 

5.2  The  Universal  Constructor  CU  +  (MC  +  L) 

5.2.1  The  constructing  arm.  Von  Neumann's  universal  constructing 
automaton  consists  of  a  constructing  unit  CU  combined  with  a  tape 
unit  MC  +  L  (Sec.  4.1.1).  He  calls  this  the  "primary  automaton/' 
and  he  calls  the  initially  quiescent  automaton  to  be  constructed  the 
"secondary  automaton"  (Sec.  1.4).  Since  the  tape  unit  has  been 
designed  (Sec.  5.1.2),  it  remains  to  design  the  constructing  unit. 

We  will  first  discuss  the  overall  arrangements  for  construction.  See 
Figure  50.  This  figure  is  not  drawn  to  scale,  the  universal  constructor 
being  very  much  larger  than  shown  here  (cf.  Fig.  37).  Also,  the  loop 
for  reading  L  is  not  shown,  nor  the  arrangement  for  lengthening  and 
shortening  the  loop  (cf.  Figs.  37  and  51). 

Some  point  on  the  universal  constructor  is  designated  as  the  origin 
(0,0)  of  a  coordinate  system  for  locating  the  secondary  automaton. 
The  secondary  automaton  occupies  a  rectangular  area  of  width  a 
and  height  (3,  the  lower  left-hand  corner  of  which  is  located  at  Xi ,  yi 
with  respect  to  the  origin  (Fig.  50). 5  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we 
will  confine  the  secondary  automaton  to  the  first  quadrant,  so  that 
Xi  ^  0  and  yi  ^  0.  The  internal  structure  of  the  secondary  automaton 
is  completely  characterized  by  the  sequence  for  i  =  0,  •  •  •  , 
a  —  1  and  j  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  /3  —  1,  where  each  Aty  specifies  one  of  the 
quiescent  states  U,  TMa0  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  and  Coo . 

4  Compare  the  discussion  of  a  universal  Turing  machine  in  the  Second  Lec- 
ture of  Part  I  with  the  discussion  of  the  universal  constructor  in  Sec.  5.3.1 
below.  See  also  Burks,  "Programming  and  the  Theory  of  Automata. " 

The  description  of  3D'(M)  which  is  given  to  a  universal  Turing  machine  is 
usually  coded  differently  than  the  description  3D(M)  which  is  given  to  a  uni- 
versal constructor.  is  coded  in  terms  of  the  states  of  the  finite  part  of 
M,  whereas  3D(M)  is  coded  in  terms  of  the  initial  states  of  the  cells  of  M.  See 
the  next  section. 

5  Cf.  Sec.  1.5.2.  In  von  Neumann's  reference  system,  a  point  such  as  (xi  , 
yi)  is  located  at  the  center  of  a  cell  rather  than  at  a  corner  of  a  cell. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


The  general  procedure  for  construction  is  this.  A  coded  representa- 
tion of  Xi  ,  yi  ,  a,  0,  and  the  Xtj  is  placed  on  the  linear  array  L.  The 
constructing  unit  CU  reads  this  information  with  the  aid  of  the 
memory  control  MC,  interprets  the  information,  and  acts  on  it.  The 
primary  automaton  operates  on  the  (possibly  remote)  secondary 
area  by  means  of  a  "constructing  arm"  or  information  path  which 
extends  from  the  primary  automaton  to  the  secondary  area.  The 
constructing  unit  CU  first  builds  the  constructing  arm  out  to  the 
secondary  area.  Then  CU  sends  signals  down  the  arm  which  con- 
struct the  secondary  automaton  and  provide  its  starting  stimulus. 
Finally,  CU  withdraws  the  constructing  arm. 

It  is  clear  that  the  first  step  in  designing  the  constructing  unit 
CU  is  to  design  the  constructing  arm  which  will  be  operated  by  CU 
under  control  of  the  information  received  from  the  tape  unit  MC  +  L. 
Actually,  we  have  essentially  used  such  a  constructing  arm  before. 
Figure  14  illustrates  a  procedure  for  extending  a  constructing  path, 
modifying  a  remote  cell,  and  withdrawing  the  constructing  path. 
This  same  procedure  is  used  for  lengthening  and  shortening  the  loops 
Ci  and  C2  and  writing  in  cell  xn  of  the  linear  array  L  (Sec.  4.2  and 
Figs.  32-36).  In  this  case,  the  upper  half  of  each  loop  constitutes 
the  constructing  path. 

In  both  of  these  cases  a  single  path  of  transmission  states  (some- 
times ordinary,  sometimes  special)  goes  from  the  constructing  device 
to  the  area  of  construction.  For  this  reason  we  will  call  this  von  Neu- 
mann's "single  path  construction  procedure."  Let  us  look  at  this 
procedure  in  detail  to  see  if  it  can  be  employed  for  the  constructing 
arm  needed  now. 

The  construction  of  the  secondary  automaton  takes  place  at  the 
end  of  the  constructing  path,  in  accordance  with  the  rules  summarized 
in  Figure  9.  The  two  processes  involved  are  the  direct  process  (for 
construction)  and  the  reverse  process  (for  destruction).  Destruction 
is  as  necessary  as  construction,  for  the  operating  terminus  of  the 
construction  path  can  be  withdrawn  only  by  changing  a  transmission 
state  Twao  into  an  unexcitable  state  U.  Construction  can  be  accom- 
plished in  a  given  cell  by  feeding  pulses  into  this  cell  from  either  an 
ordinary  or  a  special  transmission  state,  but  destruction  requires  the 
proper  kind  of  transmission  state:  special  kills  ordinary  but  not 
special,  and  ordinary  kills  special  but  not  ordinary.  This  distinction 
is  necessary  if  information  signals  are  to  be  distinguished  from  de- 
struction signals  (Sec.  2.6.2.2). 

Thus  the  operations  at  the  end  of  the  constructing  path  sometimes 
require  special  transmission  states  and  sometimes  require  ordinary 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




transmission  states.  In  Von  Neumann's  single  path  construction 
procedure  this  is  accomplished  as  follows.  The  beginning  of  the 
construction  path  is  fed  by  both  an  ordinary  transmission  state  (e.g., 
cell  Bl  of  Fig.  14)  and  by  a  special  transmission  state  (e.g.,  cell  BS 
of  Fig.  14).  Whenever  the  cell  at  the  operating  end  (head)  of  the 
constructing  path  needs  to  be  changed  from  an  ordinary  transmission 
state  to  a  special  transmission  state  (or  vice  versa),  the  whole  path 
is  changed  from  ordinary  transmission  states  to  special  transmission 
states  (or  vice  versa).  Compare  Figure  32a  with  Figure  32b  (and 
Figure  32c  with  Figure  32d). 

Each  change  of  the  single  construction  path  from  ordinary  trans- 
mission to  special  transmission  states  (or  vice  versa)  requires  a  pulse 
sequence  of  length  proportional  to  the  length  of  the  path.  For  example, 
each  such  modification  of  the  upper  half  of  loop  Ci  (and  of  loop  C2) 
was  accomplished  with  a  sequence  of  length  6n,  where  n  is  the  number 
of  cells  to  be  changed.  The  number  n  was  represented  by  the  loops 
Ci  and  C2 ,  each  of  these  loops  being  approximately  2n  cells  long. 
A  delay  of  6n  units  was  obtained  by  using  a  triple  return  counter 
with  a  loop  (Ci  or  C2)  as  its  responding  organ  (Sec.  4.2). 

This  single  path  construction  procedure  could  be  used  for  the 
constructing  arm  which  is  operated  by  the  universal  constructor. 
The  arm  would  consist  of  a  single  path  of  transmission  cells  (some- 
times ordinary,  sometimes  special)  going  from  the  universal  con- 
structor to  the  secondary  area,  and  fed  by  both  ordinary  and  special 
transmission  states.  Let  I  be  the  number  of  cells  in  this  single  path. 
To  change  this  path  from  ordinary  to  special  transmission  states 
(or  vice  versa),  CU  would  send  a  sequence  of  length  6^  into  it.  CU 
could  determine  I  from  the  numbers  x\ ,  yi  ,  a,  0,  i,  j,  which  specify 
the  location  and  size  of  the  secondary  automaton  as  well  as  the  precise 
place  within  the  secondary  where  the  constructing  arm  terminates. 
The  numbers  Xi  ,  yx  ,  a,  and  (i  are  stored  as  L  in  explicit  form,  and 
CU  could  infer  i  and  j  by  counting  the  position  of  XtJ  in  the  sequence 
of  X's. 

Though  von  Neumann  could  have  used  the  single  path  construc- 
tion procedure  for  the  constructing  arm,  he  actually  planned  to  use  a 
different,  and  better,  procedure.  Four  pages  of  rough  notes  accom- 
panied his  manuscript  "Theory  of  Automata:  Construction,  Repro- 
duction, Homogeneity,' '  which  constitutes  the  present  Part  II  of  the 
present  volume.  These  pages  contain  his  design  for  a  constructing 
arm  and  an  outline  of  a  program  for  controlling  it.  His  program  is  too 
sketchy  to  be  reconstructed,  but  his  intended  design  of  the  construct- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


ing  arm  is  plain  enough,  and  once  this  is  known  it  is  not  difficult  to 
write  a  program  for  it. 

Von  Neumann's  constructing  arm  is  shown  in  Figures  44-50. 
Ordinary  transmission  states  are  represented  by  single  arrows,  and 
special  transmission  states  are  represented  by  double  arrows.  This 
constructing  arm  consists  of  two  adjacent,  parallel  paths,  terminating 
at  a  head  in  which  one  path  normally  points  at  the  other  path.  One 
path  is  of  ordinary  transmission  states,  and  the  other  path  is  of  special 
transmission  states.  Thus,  both  ordinary  and  special  transmission 
states  are  always  available  at  the  head  for  the  reverse  (destruction) 
process.  This  being  so,  it  is  never  necessary  to  change  a  whole  path 
from  ordinary  to  special  transmission  states  or  vice  versa,  as  in  the 
single  path  construction  procedure. 

The  constructing  arm  may  be  fed  by  the  constructing  unit  CU 
either  from  the  left  (using  inputs  s  and  o  of  Fig.  44)  or  from  below 
(using  inputs  s  and  o  of  Fig.  44).  The  arm  may  turn  a  corner,  as  in 
Figure  50. 

Von  Neumann's  procedures  for  operating  the  arm,  slightly  modi- 
fied, are  shown  in  Figures  44-50.  We  use  a  new  method  of  symbolizing 
pulse  sequences  in  these  figures.  A  pulse  sequence  which  destroys 
and  constructs  is  represented  by  a  sequence  of  symbols  indicating 
the  quiescent  states  produced  by  this  pulse  sequence. 

We  will  explain  this  method  of  symbolizing  pulse  sequences  in 
connection  with  the  transition  from  Figures  45a-45b.  If  the  following 
pulse  sequences  are  fed  into  s  or  s  from  special  transmission  or  con- 
fluent states,  they  produce  the  effects  indicated. 

1110  changes  cell  CI  from  U  to  H 
1101  changes  cell  C2  from  U  to  <= 
I  changes  cell  B2  from  f  to  U 
10000  changes  cell  B2  from  U  to 

Thus  11101101110000  into  s  or  s  is  indicated  by 

II  <=  U  — » into  s  or  s  . 

This  method  of  symbolizing  pulse  sequences  must  be  used  with  the 
constraints  of  von  Neumann's  transition  rule  in  mind  (Ch.  2).  For 
example,  the  sequence 

II   H  U  into  s  or  s 

is  not  an  allowable  sequence  for  Figure  45b,  because  one  special 
transmission  state  cannot  kill  another  special  transmission  state. 
However,  if  the  appropriate  conditions  are  satisfied,  a  single  pulse 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




will  change  a  cell  into  a  U.  Likewise,  if  the  appropriate  conditions  are 
satisfied, 

10000  changes  U  into  -> 

10001  changes  U  into  ] 
1001  changes  U  into  <— 

1010  changes  U  into  [ 

1011  changes  U  into  =» 

1100  changes  U  into  tt 

1101  changes  U  into 

1110  changes  U  into  Jl 

1111  changes  U  into  C. 

Figures  45  and  46  show  the  procedure  for  advancing  the  construct- 
ing arm  1  unit,  either  horizontally  or  vertically.  Figure  47  gives  the 
procedure  for  withdrawing  the  arm  1  unit  horizontally  and  leaving 
the  two  vacated  cells  in  the  desired  quiescent  states  y  and  5.  The 
pulse  sequences  used  for  y  and  8  depend,  of  course,  on  the  quiescent 
states  desired.  For  example,  if  the  variable  y  has  the  value  C,  the 
sequence  fed  into  Figure  47e  becomes 

U  =>  U  C  into  s  or  s. 

This  expression  represents 

1101111111  into  s  or  s. 

Figure  48  gives  the  procedure  for  withdrawing  the  constructing  arm 
one  unit  vertically  and  leaving  the  vacated  cells  in  the  desired  quies- 
cent states  7  and  5.  Figure  49  shows  how  to  inject  a  starting  stimulus 
into  the  secondary  automaton. 

This  completes  the  description  of  von  Neumann's  five  operations 
for  the  constructing  arm:  horizontal  advance,  vertical  advance, 
horizontal  retreat  with  y-5,  vertical  retreat  with  y-d,  and  injection 
of  the  starting  stimulus.  These  operations  suffice  for  the  construction 
of  any  initially  quiescent  automaton  in  the  first  quadrant  (i.e.,  with 
^i^0  and  yi  ^  0).  We  will  now  state  an  algorithm  composed  from 
these  operations  which  achieves  this  result. 

This  construction  algorithm  presupposes  that  /3  is  an  even  integer. 
If  p  is  odd,  a  row  of  U's  can  be  added  to  the  secondary  to  make 
even,  or  the  algorithm  may  be  modified  slightly.  The  algorithm  also 
presupposes  that  the  secondary's  starting  stimulus  is  to  be  injected 
from  below  into  the  cell  whose  center  is  at  (xi  +  \ ,  yi  +  \).  Other- 
wise, the  instructions  must  be  modified. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


The  algorithm  for  constructing  and  starting  a  secondary  automaton 
on  the  plan  of  Figure  50  is : 

(1)  The  constructing  arm  is  extended  from  the  primary  automaton 
to  the  upper  left-hand  corner  of  the  area  of  the  secondary  autom- 
aton. This  requires  x\  +  2  horizontal  advances  and  then  yi  +  f3 
vertical  advances. 

The  constructing  arm  is  now  ready  to  advance  to  the  right  of  the 
secondary  area  and  then  to  retreat,  constructing  two  rows  of  the 
secondary  as  it  retreats. 

(2)  The  following  sequence  of  operations  is  repeated  times. 

(a)  The  horizontal  advance  is  repeated  a  —  2  times. 

(b)  The  horizontal  retreat  with  y-d  is  repeated  a  —  2  times. 

(c)  The  vertical  retreat  with  y-d  is  repeated  twice. 

At  the  end  of  operation  (2)  the  secondary  automaton  is  complete 
and  may  now  be  started. 

(3)  A  starting  stimulus  is  injected  from  below  into  the  cell  located 
at  Oi  +  }). 

The  secondary  automaton  now  begins  to  operate,  and  the  construct- 
ing arm  may  be  withdrawn. 

(4)  The  constructing  arm  is  withdrawn  to  the  primary  automaton  by 
yi  vertical  retreats  with  7-5  followed  by  X\  +  2  horizontal  re- 
treats with  7-5,  both  y  and  b  always  being  the  unexcitable  state 
U. 

This  concludes  the  algorithm.  The  constructing  arm  could  now  be 
used  to  construct  another  secondary  automaton. 

The  pulse  sequences  which  execute  this  algorithm  are  injected  into 
inputs  s  and  o  of  the  constructing  arm.  These  pulse  sequences  are  a 
function  of  the  information  stored  on  the  linear  array  L.  The  way 
the  universal  constructor  transforms  the  passive  information  on  L 
into  the  correct  pulse  sequences  will  be  explained  in  Section  5.2.3. 

Von  Neumann's  five  constructing  arm  operations  are  adequate  for 
construction  in  the  first  quadrant,  but  not  for  construction  in  the 
other  quadrants.  However,  it  is  not  difficult  to  redesign  the  head  and 
to  program  operations  for  advancing  to  the  left,  retreating  from  the 
left,  advancing  down,  etc.  With  these  additional  operations,  the  uni- 
versal constructor  could  construct  a  secondary  automaton  in  any 
quadrant  of  the  plane.  This  presupposes,  of  course,  that  the  area  for 
the  secondary  automaton  consists  of  unexcitable  states,  that  there 
is  a  sufficiently  wide  path  of  unexcitable  states  from  the  universal 
constructor  to  this  area,  and  that  no  other  automaton  interferes  with 
the  construction  process. 

It  is  clear  from  Figures  45-49  that  the  execution  of  each  of  von 


AUTOMATA  SELF-KEPRODUCTION 




Neumann's  five  constructing  arm  operations  is  accomplished  by  a 
finite  pulse  sequence.  The  longest  sequence  needed  is  that  for  a 
vertical  retreat  with  y-8  ;  if  y  and  5  are  either  — ->  or  f  ,  this  operation 
requires  a  sequence  of  length  47.  Thus  the  length  of  the  pulse  sequence 
required  for  each  of  these  five  operations  is  a  constant,  independent 
of  the  length  of  the  constructing  arm.  In  contrast,  von  Neumann's 
one-path  construction  procedure  requires  a  pulse  sequence  whose 
length  depends  on  the  length  of  the  path;  if  i  is  the  length  of  the  path, 
a  sequence  of  length  bt  or  greater  is  required.  In  this  respect,  von 
Neumann's  two-path  construction  procedure  is  far  superior  to  his 
one-path  construction  procedure.  This  superiority  can  have  a  pro- 
found effect  on  the  organs  supplying  the  pulse  sequences  for  construc- 
tion, as  we  shall  now  see. 

5.2.2  Redesign  of  the  memory  control  MC.  Von  Neumann's  two- 
path  construction  procedure  can  be  used  for  operating  the  linear  array 
L.  The  new  arrangement  is  shown  in  Figure  51 ;  it  should  be  compared 
with  the  old  arrangement  of  Figure  37. 

The  path  for  reading  cell  xn  starts  at  input  v,  extends  along  row 
1,  passes  through  cell  xn  ,  returns  along  row  4,  and  terminates  at 
output  w.  Row  1  is  also  the  ordinary  transmission  path  of  the  two- 
path  constructing  arm.  Row  2  is  the  special  transmission  path  of  the 
constructing  arm.  The  head  of  the  constructing  arm  consists  of  cells 
C2,  Dl,  and  D2\  it  differs  slightly  from  the  head  of  Figure  44a.  The 
stimuli  into  inputs  u  and  v  must  come  from  ordinary  transmission 
states.  Note  that  cells  Al  and  A2  do  not  affect  each  other,  since  a 
confluent  state  does  not  feed  a  confluent  state. 

The  reading  process  is  exactly  the  same  as  before  (Sees.  4.1.1  and 
4.1.5).  The  sequence  10101  is  injected  into  v  from  a  pulser  P (10101). 
This  sequence  will  travel  along  row  1,  down  column  D,  and  into 
cell  xn  .  What  happens  next  depends  upon  whether  cell  xn  is  in  state 
U,  signifying  a  "zero,"  or  in  state  j  ,  signifying  a  "one." 

(1 )  If  cell  xn  is  in  state  U,  the  first  part  1010  of  the  sequence  changes 
xn  into  \  ,  and  the  remaining  part  T  of  the  sequence  travels 
back  along  row  4  and  out  at  exit  w. 

(2)  If  cell  xn  is  in  state  j  ,  the  complete  sequence  10101  travels 
through  xn  ,  back  along  row  4,  and  out  at  exit  w. 

Thus  a  T  at  w  signifies  a  "zero,"  while  a  10101  at  w  signifies  a  "one." 
These  two  sequences  may  be  discriminated  by  means  of  the  T  vs. 
10101  discriminator  (Sec.  3.5  and  Fig.  25),  as  before. 

At  the  end  of  the  reading  process,  the  reading  and  constructing 
paths  are  left  as  in  Figure  51b,  with  cell  xn  in  state  [  .  The  next  step 
is  to  lengthen  or  shorten  the  reading  and  construction  paths  of  L, 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


and  to  leave  cell  xn  in  state  U  (representing  a  "zero")  or  state  [ 
(representing  a  "one").  There  are  four  alternatives: 

(LO)  Lengthen  and  leave  cell  xn  in  U 
(LI )  Lengthen  and  leave  cell  xn  in  [ 

(50)  Shorten  and  leave  cell  xn  in  U 

(51 )  Shorten  and  leave  cell  xn  in  J,  . 

These  operations  are  similar  to  the  operations  of  horizontal  ad- 
vance (Fig.  45),  vertical  advance  (Fig.  46),  horizontal  retreat  with 
y-8  (Fig.  47),  and  vertical  retreat  with  y-d  (Fig.  48).  We  will  give 
the  pulse  sequences  for  only  one  case,  that  of  (LI),  i.e.,  lengthening 
and  leaving  cell  xn  in  {  .  These  are  given  in  Figure  52,  where  the 
method  of  symbolizing  sequences  is  the  same  as  in  the  earlier  figures. 
For  example,  starting  with  the  situation  of  Figure  52a,  the  sequence 
1111011110110111001  of  ordinary  stimuli  into  u  passes  through  the 
confluent  state  into  the  row  of  special  transmission  states  and  travels 
down  this  row.  This  sequence  changes  cell  xn  ,  the  cells  above  and 
below  it,  and  the  cell  below  xn  +  1,  into  II  ,  Ji  ,  =>,  and  <— ,  respec- 
tively. Figure  52b  shows  the  situation  produced  by  this  sequence. 

Thus  this  operation  (LI)  is  accomplished  by  sending  a  sequence 
into  u,  then  a  sequence  into  v,  another  sequence  into  u,  and  another 
sequence  into  v.  Since  the  absence  of  a  stimulus  is  represented  by 
"0,"  this  operation  can  be  accomplished  by  sending  simultaneously 
a  sequence  into  u  and  a  sequence  into  v\  see  the  example  of  Figure 
14  and  Section  2.8.3.  These  two  sequences  can  be  produced  by  pulsers 
which  feed  into  u  and  v  and  which  are  stimulated  in  the  proper  phase 
relative  to  one  another  (Sec.  3.2.1).  The  other  lengthening,  shorten- 
ing, and  writing  operations  (L0),  (SO),  and  (SI)  can  be  handled 
similarly. 

It  is  important  that  each  of  the  operations  (L0),  (LI),  (SO),  and 
(SI)  may  be  accomplished  by  pulse  sequences  whose  lengths  are 
independent  of  the  lengths  of  the  construction  paths,  i.e.,  independent 
of  the  index  n  of  the  cell  xn  which  is  under  scan.  In  contrast,  von 
Neumann's  method  of  operating  the  linear  array  L  requires  pulse 
sequences  whose  lengths  depend  on  the  length  of  the  construction 
path  (Ch.  4).  As  a  consequence,  the  memory  control  for  the  new 
method  of  operating  L  can  be  much  simpler  than  von  Neumann's 
memory  control  MC  (Figs.  37,  39-41).  In  particular,  those  aspects 
of  von  Neumann's  MC  concerned  with  obtaining  and  controlling  a 
delay  of  6n  (where  n  is  the  subscript  of  xn)  are  unnecessary  in  the 
new  method. 

Since  von  Neumann's  design  of  MC,  as  modified  in  Section  5.1.2, 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




does  work,  we  will  not  redesign  MC  here.  The  read-write-erase  unit 
RWE  for  the  new  method  of  operating  L  can  be  constructed  from 
nine  pulsers  and  a  I  vs.  10101  discriminator,  suitably  arranged.  By 
recoding  and  simplifying  the  control  signals  which  pass  between  MC 
and  the  constructing  unit  CU,  one  can  eliminate  the  read-write- 
erase  control  RWEC,  so  that  MC  will  consist  only  of  the  simplified 
RWE  unit  and  a  coded  channel.6 

At  this  point  I  should  like  to  speculate  on  von  Neumann's  thoughts 
concerning  his  design  for  a  self -reproducing  automaton  at  the  time 
he  stopped  working  on  the  manuscript  reproduced  as  Chapters  1-4 
above.  His  design  had  turned  out  to  be  much  more  complex  than 
he  had  anticipated.7  After  developing  his  two -path  construction 
procedure,  he  must  have  realized  that  it  could  be  used  on  L,  and 
that  this  would  greatly  simplify  the  design  of  MC  and  of  the  whole 
machine.  Realizing  this,  he  would  have  wanted  to  redesign  his  self- 
reproducing  automaton  along  new  lines.  This  redesign  would  have 
entailed  revising  Chapter  3  above  and  starting  Chapter  4  afresh. 
Von  Neumann  never  found  the  time  to  revise  and  complete  the 
manuscript  in  this  way. 

Even  though  von  Neumann's  design  of  the  memory  control  MC 
can  be  greatly  improved,  it  is  nevertheless  important.  Historically, 
it  constitutes  the  first  proof  that  a  tape  unit  with  unlimited  memory 
can  be  embedded  in  his  29 -state  cellular  structure.  Moreover,  it  con- 
tains many  ingenious  design  techniques  for  parallel  data  processing 
in  this  cellular  structure. 

5.2.3  The  constructing  unit  CU.  After  he  had  designed  the  con- 
structing arm,  there  remained  for  von  Neumann  the  task  of  designing 
the  constructing  unit  CU  itself.  As  he  recognized,  CU  is  a  finite 
automaton  which  interacts  with  the  tape  unit  MC  +  L  and  also 

6  The  complete  design  of  a  memory  control  for  a  variant  of  the  new  method 
of  operating  L  is  given  in  Thatcher's  "Universality  in  the  von  Neumann  Cellu- 
lar Model." 

7  In  a  letter  to  Miodrag  Muntyan  of  the  University  of  Illinois  Press,  dated 
Nov.  4,  1952,  von  Neumann  says  of  his  manuscript: 

I  have  written  so  far  the  first  chapter,  which  amounts  to  about  40  type- 
written pages.  ...  I  am  now  working  on  the  second  chapter  which,  I 
expect,  will  be  somewhat  longer,  perhaps  about  twice  as  long.  I  will 
also  have  a  third  chapter  and  possibly  a  fourth  one,  but  the  length  of 
these  is  still  uncertain.  Also,  when  the  whole  is  finished,  I  will  have  to 
go  over  the  entire  text  once  more,  and  this  operation  is  likely  to  in- 
crease the  length  some  more. 

Compare  this  with  von  Neumann's  letter  to  Goldstine  in  Sec.  1.1.2.3  above. 
These  statements  show  that  after  completing  Ch.  1  above,  von  Neumann 

thought  he  could  develop  the  design  (starting  with  Ch.  2  above)  in  a  chapter 

about  twice  as  long  as  Ch.  1. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


performs  the  function  of  construction.  Hence  the  same  kinds  of 
organs  and  design  principles  used  in  the  design  of  the  memory  control 
MC  (Ch.  4)  and  an  arbitrary  finite  automaton  FA  (Sec.  5.1.3)  can 
be  used  to  design  CU.  Since  von  Neumann  was  a  skilled  designer  and 
programmer,8  he  undoubtedly  saw  how  to  design  the  constructing 
unit  CU,  and  he  may  even  have  had  a  quite  specific  design  plan  in 
mind. 

While  it  is  not  appropriate  for  us  to  work  out  the  full  design  here, 
we  will  say  enough  to  show  that  a  workable  constructing  unit  CU 
does  in  fact  exist.  A  complete  design  for  a  constructing  unit  (as  well 
as  for  a  universal  constructing  machine)  is  given  in  James  Thatcher's 
"Universality  in  the  von  Neumann  Cellular  Model."  9 

Von  Neumann  discussed  the  process  of  constructing  several  sec- 
ondary automata  (Sec.  1.7),  but  it  will  suffice  here  to  explain  the 
construction  of  a  single  secondary  automaton  in  the  first  quadrant. 
The  information  concerning  the  location  and  size  of  the  secondary 
automaton,  as  well  as  a  complete  description  of  the  secondary  autom- 
aton, is  stored  on  the  linear  array  L,  as  in  Figure  50.  First  comes  a 
period.  Then  come  the  location  and  size  parameters  Xi  ,  yi  ,  a,  and  /3, 
each  followed  by  a  comma.  Next  comes  the  sequence  of  Xf/s  describing 
the  secondary  automaton  cell  by  cell,  for  i  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  a  —  1  and 
j  =  0,  •  •  •  ,  j8  —  1.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  assume  that  the 
X»/s  are  stored  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  used  by  CU.  The  se- 
quence of  Xt/s  is  terminated  by  a  period,  which  also  marks  the  end  of 
the  information  on  the  tape. 

This  information  may  be  coded  in  an  alphabet  of  14  characters: 
zero,  one,  comma,  period,  and  10  values  of  the  .  These  10  values 
of  the  \{j  correspond  to  the  10  quiescent  states  Tuao  {u  =  0,  1  and 
a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  C0o ,  and  U.  These  14  characters  may  be  represented 
by  four  binary  digits  (bits).  It  is  convenient  to  avoid  the  all  zero 
sequence  "0000."  It  is  also  convenient  to  employ  a  fifth  bit  position 
for  marking  purposes.  Thus  each  character  is  represented  by  a  total 
of  five  bits  and  is  stored  in  five  successive  cells  of  the  linear  array  L. 

The  number  x\  will  be  represented  by  a  sequence  of  X\  +  1  of  the 
five-bit  characters  representing  "one,"  and  similarly  for  the  numbers 

8  See  pp.  6-15  of  the  "Introduction"  to  the  present  work,  as  well  as  Chs. 
3  and  4. 

9  See  also  Codd,  "Propagation,  Computation,  and  Construction  in  Two- 
Dimensional  Spaces."  This  contains  a  design  for  a  universal  constructing 
machine  in  a  cellular  system  in  which  each  cell  has  four  immediate  neighbors, 
but  only  8  states,  as  contrasted  with  von  Neumann's  29  states.  Dr.  Thatcher 
and  Dr.  Codd  were  acquainted  with  von  Neumann's  manuscript  "The  Theory 
of  Automata:  Construction,  Reproduction,  Homogeneity"  in  manuscript  form. 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




7/1  ,  a,  and  13.  This  method  of  representation  can  clearly  be  improved, 
but  it  will  simplify  our  discussion  to  represent  all  information  in  the 
same  alphabet. 

Let  00 ,  0i  ,  02 ,  #3 ,  04  be  the  five  bits  of  a  character,  with  0O  being 
the  marker  bit.  The  constructing  unit  CU  must  be  capable  of  inter- 
preting the  sequence  0i  ,  02  ,  03  ,  04  as  a  unit.  Suppose,  for  example, 
that  Coo  is  represented  by  -1010  on  L,  where  the  dash  indicates  the 
position  of  the  marker  bit.  If  the  character  Xty  on  L  is  -1010,  CU  must 
put  cell  (i,  j)  of  the  secondary  automaton  in  state  C0o  at  the  appro- 
priate stage  of  the  construction  process.  CU  will  accomplish  this  by 
replacing  y  or  d  in  the  sequences  for  horizontal  or  vertical  retreat 
(Figs.  47  and  48)  by  the  sequence  1111,  which  is  the  sequence  re- 
quired by  the  transition  rule  (Fig.  10)  for  constructing  C0o .  Hence 
CU  must  interpret  the  tape  character  -1010  as  calling  for  the  sequence 
1111  in  the  appropriate  context. 

Now  the  four  bits  of  0i  ,  02 ,  03  ,  04  are  stored  in  successive  cells 
Xn+i  ,  xn+2 ,  £n+3 ,  #n+4 .  When  CU  so  instructs  MC,  MC  will  read  a 
cell  and  advance  the  reading  loop  to  the  next  cell.  The  amount  of 
time  required  for  this  process  is  a  linear  function  of  the  index  n. 
Consequently,  the  four  bits  0X  ,  02 ,  03 ,  and  04  are  received  by  CU  at 
widely  varying  times.  In  von  Neumann's  terminology  (Sec.  3.1.1), 
the  sequence  1010  comes  to  CU  freely  timed,  and  in  response  CU 
must  send  the  rigidly  timed  sequence  1111  down  the  construction 
arm.  The  four  pulses  of  1111  must  enter  the  constructing  arm  at 
successive  times  (r,  r  +  1,  r  +  2,  r  +  3),  since  rigid  timing  is  re- 
quired by  the  direct  process. 

Hence  the  constructing  unit  CU  must  be  able  to  convert  the  freely 
timed  sequence  0i ,  02 ,  03  ,  04  (e.g.,  1010)  into  a  rigidly  timed  sequence 
(e.g.,  1111).  This  may  be  accomplished  in  either  of  two  ways. 

The  first  method  employs  state  organs  like  Figure  43.  Associate 
with  the  16  characters  0i020304  30  state  organs  SO0 ,  SOi  ;  SOoo ,  •  •  •  , 
SOn  ;  SOoooo ,  •  •  •  ,  SOmi  ,  which  are  to  be  interconnected  by  the 
coded  channel  of  CU.  These  organs  are  activated  (take  control) 
under  the  influence  of  the  bits  0X  ,  02  ,  03  ,  04  in  the  following  manner. 
When  0i  is  transmitted  by  MC  to  CU,  it  has  this  conditional  effect:  if 
0i  is  zero,  SOo  is  activated;  while  if  0X  is  one,  SOi  is  activated.  Next, 
the  bit  02  shifts  control  from  SO0  or  SOi  to  one  of  the  state  organs 
SOoo ,  SOoi ,  SOio ,  SOn  according  to  the  rule:  if  02  is  zero,  SO^o  is  ac- 
tivated, while  if  02  is  one,  SO^i  is  activated.  That  is,  after  CU  has 
received  the  two  bits  0X  and  02  from  MC,  the  state  organ  SO^t, 
will  be  "in  control. "  This  process  is  repeated  for  the  remaining  bits  03 
and  04 ,  so  that  after  all  bits  of  0i020304  have  been  read  from  L,  ex- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


actly  one  of  the  16  state  organs  SOe^e^  of  CU  will  be  activated. 
This  state  organ  then  controls  the  selection  of  a  rigidly  timed  se- 
quence. For  example,  the  state  organ  SO1010  will  cause  1111  to  be 
substituted  for  y  or  8  in  one  of  the  constructing  sequences  of  Figures 
47  and  48. 

The  conversion  of  the  freely  timed  sequence  1010  into  the  rigidly 
timed  sequence  1111  is  a  static -dynamic  conversion.  Our  second 
method  of  making  this  conversion  employs  the  static -dynamic  con- 
verter of  Figure  53,  together  with  four  state  organs  SO1,  SO2,  SO3, 
and  SO4  to  keep  track  of  the  four  digit  positions  0i ,  02 ,  03 ,  and  04 , 
respectively.  The  inputs  and  outputs  of  the  static-dynamic  converter 
and  of  these  four  state  organs  are  all  connected  to  the  main  channel 
of  CU.  The  periodic  pulsers  of  Figure  53  are  copies  of  the  alternate 
periodic  pulser  PP(T)  of  Figure  20.  The  organs  in  the  left-hand  col- 
umns of  Figure  53  are  all  decoders  which  receive  their  inputs  from 
the  main  channel.  The  figure  is  not,  of  course,  drawn  to  scale. 

The  static -dynamic  converter  and  the  four  state  organs  SO1,  SO2, 
SO3,  SO4  convert  a  freely  timed  sequence  0i  ,  02  ,  03 ,  04  into  the 
corresponding  coded  rigidly  timed  sequence  in  the  following  way. 
At  the  beginning  of  this  conversion  the  state  organ  SO1  is  in  control 
and  directs  the  reading  of  0i  .  After  0i  is  read  by  MC  from  L  it  is 
transmitted  to  CU:  a  pulse  from  exit  ii  of  MC  (Fig.  37)  signifies  that 
0i  is  "zero,"  a  pulse  from  exit  i2  of  MC  signifies  that  0i  is  "one." 
Under  the  control  of  SO1,  the  pulse  signifying  "one"  is  coded  into  a 
sequence  which  is  recognized  only  by  the  Starti  decoder  of  Figure  53 
(input  di)  and  control  is  transferred  to  SO2.  Hence  if  0i  is  "one,"  the 
PP(T)  for  0!  is  activated,  while  if  0i  is  "zero,"  the  PP(1)  for  0X  is  left 
in  the  inactive  state. 

Similarly,  bit  02  is  transferred  to  the  PP  (T)  for  02  by  means  of  state 
organ  SO2  and  the  Start2  decoder  of  Figure  53.  The  bits  03  and  04  are 
handled  in  the  same  way.  Hence,  after  the  character  -01020304  has 
been  read  by  MC  from  L  and  transmitted  to  CU,  the  periodic  pulsers 
of  the  static -dynamic  converter  represent  0i020304 ,  the  j'th  periodic 
pulser  being  off  or  on  according  to  whether  0y  is  "zero"  or  "one" 
( j  =  1,  2,  3,  4).  The  control  unit  CU  next  directs  the  conversion  of 
this  static  information  into  a  rigidly  timed  sequence. 

The  static  representation  of  the  character  — 0i020304  is  converted 
into  the  corresponding  dynamic  sequence  0i020304  by  a  single  pulse 
sequence  of  the  main  channel  which  is  recognized  by  the  conversion 
decoders  Di  ,  D2 ,  D3  ,  and  D4  of  Figure  53.  The  operation  of  each 
decoder  Dy  is  as  follows,  for,;  =  1,  2,  3,  4.  Dy  emits  a  pulse  which  is 
delayed  in  Ay  and  then  impinges  on  the  confluent  state  of  column  A, 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




row  j.  If  the  PP  (1 )  for  6j  is  on,  this  pulse  is  passed  and  enters  channel 
B;  otherwise,  this  pulse  is  blocked  and  does  not  enter  B.  The  pulse 
sequence  of  the  main  channel  which  is  recognized  by  the  decoders 
Di ,  D2  ,  D3 ,  and  D4  enters  these  four  decoders  at  different  times.  But 
the  delays  Ai  ,  A2 ,  A3 ,  and  A4  can  be  adjusted  so  that  the  pulses 
which  do  enter  channel  B  are  in  proper  phase.  For  example,  if  61  , 
62,63,  and  64  are  all  one,  the  sequence  1111  will  be  emitted  from 
output  g. 

Since  the  all-zero  sequence  is  not  used  to  represent  any  character, 
61 ,  62  ,  03  ,  and  64  cannot  all  be  zero,  and  at  least  one  stimulus  will  be 
emitted  from  g.  Hence,  stimulation  of  the  conversion  decoders  Di  , 
D2 ,  D3 ,  and  D4  will  cause  the  rigidly  timed  sequence  61626264  to  leave 
the  static-dynamic  converter  at  exit  g.  The  periodic  pulsers  of  the 
static -dynamic  converter  can  then  be  "cleared"  back  to  the  inactive 
state  by  stimulating  the  four  stop  decoders,  whose  inputs  are  labeled  /. 

This  completes  the  discussion  of  the  two  methods  for  converting  a 
static  tape  character  into  a  dynamic  sequence.  The  second  method 
requires  less  apparatus  than  the  first. 

We  now  have  a  method  for  reading  characters  from  the  tape.  At 
the  end  of  Section  5.2.1  we  gave  an  algorithm  for  constructing  and 
starting  a  secondary  automaton.  This  algorithm  describes  the  pulse 
sequences  to  be  injected  into  the  constructing  arm  as  a  function  of  the 
information  X\  ,  yi  ,  a\  ,  j8,  A0o ,  ■  •  •  ,  Aa-i,  0-1  stored  on  L.  The  design 
of  the  constructing  unit  CU  now  becomes  the  task  of  translating  this 
algorithm  into  a  machine  design.  We  restate  this  algorithm  here, 
showing  how  CU  obtains  the  necessary  information  for  the  construc- 
tion from  the  linear  array  L.  We  assume  that  initially  the  reading 
loop  of  L  passes  through  cell  x0 ,  i.e.,  through  the  marker  bit  of  the 
leftmost  period  on  L. 

The  revised  algorithm  for  constructing  and  starting  a  secondary 
automaton  (see  Fig.  50)  is: 

(1)  CU  extends  the  constructing  arm  from  itself  to  the  upper  left- 
hand  corner  of  the  area  of  the  secondary  automaton.  This  is 
accomplished  by  the  following  two  sub-operations: 
(a)  CU  sends  pulse  sequences  into  the  constructing  arm  for 
Xi  +  2  horizontal  advances.  The  pulse  sequences  for  each 
horizontal  advance  are  given  in  Figure  45.  CU  senses  a 
character  (tally)  of  Xi  on  L,  sends  the  sequences  of  Figure 
45,  and  then  moves  right  to  the  next  character  on  L.  When 
CU  reads  the  comma  on  L,  it  sends  pulses  for  two  more 
horizontal  advances,  and  then  goes  to  execute  sub-opera- 
tion (b). 


284  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

(b)  CU  sends  pulse  sequences  into  the  constructing  arm  for 
+  vertical  advances.  It  does  this  as  follows.  CU  senses 
each  character  (tally)  on  L,  sends  the  sequences  of  Figure 
46  to  the  constructing  arm,  and  advances  to  the  next 
character  on  L.  When  CU  reaches  the  comma  on  L,  it 
passes  over  a  to  0,  sends  the  sequences  of  Figure  46  for 
each  character  of  0,  and  then  returns  to  the  comma  pre- 
ceding a. 

The  constructing  arm  is  now  in  position  to  begin  construction. 
CU  constructs  two  rows  of  the  secondary  automaton  at  a  time,  and 
must  do  this  0/2  times.  CU  keeps  count  of  these  operations  by  mark- 
ing the  marker  positions  of  the  characters  of  0. 

(2)  CU  senses  if  0  contains  any  unmarked  characters.  If  0  contains 
no  unmarked  characters,  CU  unmarks  all  the  characters  of  0 
and  all  the  X's,  and  then  proceeds  to  operation  (3).  If  0  contains 
an  unmarked  character,  CU  marks  two  characters  of  0  and  exe- 
cutes sub -operations  (a),  (b),  and  (c)  in  that  order. 

(a)  CU  repeats  the  horizontal  advance  a  —  2  times.  It  accom- 
plishes this  by  passing  over  the  first  two  tallies  of  a  and 
then  sending  the  sequences  of  Figure  45  into  the  construct- 
ing arm  for  each  of  the  remaining  tallies  of  a. 

(b)  CU  repeats  the  horizontal  retreat  with  y-8  for  a  —  2  times. 
It  does  this  by  marking  two  characters  of  a,  and  then  exe- 
cuting the  following  operation  until  all  characters  of  a 
are  marked :  mark  an  unmarked  character  of  a  and  execute 
the  horizontal  retreat  with  y-8  of  Figure  47. 

The  horizontal  retreat  with  y-8  requires  the  substitution 
of  pulse  sequences  for  y  and  for  8  according  to  the  states 
\n  and  to  be  constructed  in  the  cells  at  the  terminus 
of  the  constructing  arm.  To  obtain  these  X's,  CU  must  find 
them  on  L  and  move  the  reading  loop  from  a  to  them; 
later  CU  must  return  the  reading  loop  to  a.  In  both  cases, 
CU  can  sense  the  place  to  stop  by  means  of  markers:  each 
time  it  uses  a  character  of  a  or  a  X,  CU  will  mark  it.  We  are 
assuming  that  the  X's  are  placed  on  L  from  right  to  left  in 
order  of  use. 

After  CU  has  executed  the  horizontal  retreat  with  7-5 
for  a  —  2  times,  it  removes  the  markers  from  a  and  proceeds 
to  sub-operation  (c). 

(c)  CU  repeats  the  vertical  retreat  with  y-8  twice,  using  and 
marking  the  next  two  X's  on  L. 

At  the  end  of  operation  (2),  CU  has  completed  the  construction  of 
the  secondary  automaton  and  proceeds  to  start  it. 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




(3)  CU  injects  the  starting  stimulus  into  the  secondary  automaton 
by  means  of  the  sequences  of  Figure  49.  Exit  e  of  this  figure  is 
an  input  to  the  cell  located  at  (zi  +  |,  yi  +  §),  and  so  this 
presupposes  that  the  secondary  automaton  is  designed  to  receive 
its  starting  stimulus  through  the  bottom  of  this  cell. 

The  secondary  automaton  now  begins  to  operate  and  CU  proceeds 
to  withdraw  the  constructing  arm  back  to  itself. 

(4)  CU  withdraws  the  constructing  arm  by  sending  sequences  into 
it  for  yi  vertical  retreats  with  7-5  followed  by  X\  +  2  horizontal 
retreats  with  7-5.  The  required  sequences  are  given  in  Figures 
48  and  47,  respectively.  In  every  case  both  y  and  5  are  to  be  U, 
which  means  that  single  pulses  are  to  be  used  for  each  occurrence 
of  7  and  of  5.  CU  keeps  count  of  these  retreats  by  means  of  the 
numbers  yi  and  X\  on  L. 

This  concludes  the  algorithm  for  constructing  and  starting  a  secondary 
automaton.  Note  that  at  the  end  of  the  algorithm  the  universal 
constructor  CU  +  (MC  +  L)  is  again  in  its  starting  state. 

Now  that  this  algorithm  is  formulated,  the  design  of  the  construct- 
ing unit  CU  reduces  to  the  problem  of  translating  this  algorithm 
into  a  machine  design.  This  can  be  done  by  using  state  organs  SO 
like  Figure  43,  interconnected  by  a  coded  channel,  with  the  specific 
interconnections  between  each  state  organ  and  the  other  state  organs 
reflecting  the  content  of  the  algorithm.  Control  within  CU  is  shifted 
from  one  state  organ  SO  to  another  under  the  influence  of  the  infor- 
mation on  L  according  to  the  content  of  the  algorithm.  Note  that 
the  memory  control  MC  operates  in  a  similar  manner,  with  the  con- 
trol organs  CO  playing  the  role  of  state  organs. 

In  Section  5.1.3,  we  noted  the  resemblance  of  the  constructing 
unit  CU  to  a  finite  automaton  FA,  and  the  similarity  of  von  Neu- 
mann's universal  constructor  to  Turing's  universal  computing  ma- 
chine. Let  us  look  at  these  resemblances  more  closely. 

A  universal  computing  machine  Mu  has  two  parts:  a  tape  unit 
MC  +  L  and  a  finite  automaton  FA  which  interacts  with  this  tape 
unit.  Correspondingly,  the  universal  constructor  Mc  has  the  two 
parts  MC  +  L  and  CU.  The  constructing  unit  CU  performs  two 
interrelated  functions:  it  interacts  with  MC  +  L  and  it  constructs 
the  secondary  automaton  whose  description  is  stored  on  L.  The 
processes  involved  in  constructing  a  secondary  automaton  are  not 
novel:  these  processes  are  already  employed  in  the  tape  unit  MC  + 
L.  More  specifically,  the  reading  loop  is  moved  from  one  cell  to 
another  cell  on  L  by  means  of  the  same  kind  of  construction  and 
destruction  steps  used  in  constructing  a  secondary  automaton.  Thus 
the  constructing  arm  of  Figures  44-50  is  very  similar  to  the  construct- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


ing  arm  of  Figures  51-52,  and  either  arm  could  be  used  in  place  of 
the  other. 

This  comparison  shows  that  the  constructing  unit  CU  is  really  a 
special  kind  of  finite  automaton,  and  that  the  same  kinds  of  organs 
and  design  principles  used  in  the  design  of  the  memory  control 
MC  (Ch.  4)  and  an  arbitrary  finite  automaton  FA  (Sec.  5.1.3)  can 
be  used  to  design  CU.  This  comparison  shows  also  that  in  the  con- 
text of  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure,  the  output  of  the  universal 
computing  machine  Mu  is  not  as  different  from  the  output  of  the 
universal  constructor  Mc  as  it  might  seem.  The  output  of  Mu  is  a 
computation,  while  the  output  of  Mc  is  a  construction,  but  both  are 
accomplished  by  sending  signals  into  constructing  arms. 

This  concludes  our  discussion  of  the  constructing  unit  CU.  We 
have  shown  that  it  can  be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state 
cellular  structure,  and  we  have  stated  the  general  principles  of  its 
design. 

The  constructing  unit  CU  together  with  the  tape  unit  MC  +  L 
constitutes  a  universal  constructor.  Hence  there  can  be  embedded  in  von 
Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure  a  universal  constructor  Mc  with 
this  property:  for  each  initially  quiescent  automaton  M,  there  is  a  coded 
description  £>(M)  of  M  such  that,  when  £)(M)  is  placed  on  a  tape  L 
attached  to  Mc ,  Mc  will  construct  M. 

This  answers  von  Neumann's  question  about  construction  uni- 
versality :  can  any  single  automaton  construct  every  other  automaton 
(Sec.  1.1)?  The  only  question  remaining  is  his  question  about  au- 
tomata self -reproduction:  can  an  automaton  construct  copies  of 
itself?  We  will  present  an  affirmative  answer  to  this  question  also, 
after  first  summarizing  von  Neumann's  accomplishments  in  the 
present  work. 

5.3  Conclusion 

5.3.1  Summary  of  the  present  work.  Von  Neumann  began  the  pres- 
ent Part  II  by  asking  five  main  questions,  some  of  which  contain 
sub-questions  (Sec.  1.1.2.1).  The  first  main  question  concerns 
(A)  Logical  universality: 

(Al)  When  is  a  class  of  automata  logically  universal? 
(A2)  Is  any  single  automaton  logically  universal? 
A  finite  automaton  with  an  indefinitely  extendible  tape  is  called  a 
Turing  machine  (see  the  end  of  the  Second  Lecture  of  Part  I  above). 
Turing  showed  that  the  class  of  Turing  machines  is  logically  universal 
in  the  sense  that  any  logical  process  (computation)  that  is  at  all 
performable  by  finite  but  arbitrarily  extensive  means  can  be  per- 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION  287 

formed  by  a  Turing  machine.  Turing  further  showed  that  there  is  a 
universal  Turing  machine,  that  is,  a  Turing  machine  which  can 
perform  any  given  computation. 

Thus,  as  von  Neumann  stated,  Turing  has  answered  these  two 
questions  about  logical  universality.  Von  Neumann  then  posed 
analogous  questions  about  construction. 

(B )  Constructibility: 

(Bl)  Can  an  automaton  be  constructed  by  another  autom- 
aton? 

(B2)  What  class  of  automata  can  be  constructed  by  a  single 
suitable  automaton? 

(C)  Construction  universality:  Is  any  single  automaton  construction 
universal? 

(D )  Self -reproduction: 

(Dl)  Is  there  a  self -reproducing  automaton? 
(D2)  Is  there  an  automaton  which  can  both  reproduce  itself 
and  perform  further  tasks? 
Von  Neumann  promised  to  answer  all  these  questions  affirmatively 
by  constructive  means,  that  is,  by  designing  various  kinds  of  con- 
structing and  self -reproducing  automata. 

Questions  (C)  and  (D)  lead  to  his  last  main  question. 

(E)  Evolution: 

(El )  Can  the  construction  of  automata  by  automata  progress 
from  simpler  types  to  increasingly  complicated  types? 

(E2)  Assuming  some  suitable  definition  of  efficiency,  can  this 
evolution  go  from  less  efficient  to  more  efficient  au- 
tomata? 

Von  Neumann  made  a  few  remarks  relevant  to  evolution  in  Sections 
1.7  and  1.8  but  never  returned  to  this  topic.10 

After  formulating  the  five  main  questions,  von  Neumann  proceeded 
to  make  questions  (B)-(D)  more  precise.  In  effect,  the  rest  of  Chapter 
1  and  all  of  Chapter  2  are  directed  to  this  task.  We  will  give  a  brief 
summary  of  the  development  of  these  chapters. 

Idealized  neurons  are  adequate  to  handle  the  purely  logical  func- 
tions of  automata,  but  construction  requires  organs  which  can  per- 
form those  non-logical  functions  which  are  required  for  the  acquisition 
and  combination  of  the  organs  of  which  the  constructed  automata 
are  composed  (Sec.  1.2).  In  his  kinematic  model,  von  Neumann 
introduced  girders,  sensing  elements,  kinematic  elements,  joining 
elements,  and  cutting  elements  to  achieve  these  non-logical  functions  (— 

10  See  also  our  discussion  of  his  "probabilistic  model  of  self-reproduction 
and  evolution'*  at  the  end  of  Sec.  1.1.2.3. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(Fifth  Lecture,  Part  I,  and  Sec.  1.1.2.3).  In  the  present  attempt,  he 
preferred  to  avoid  the  kinematieal  aspects  of  self -reproduction  so  that 
he  could  concentrate  on  the  logical-combinatorial  aspects  of  this 
topic  (Sec.  1.3.1.1).  He  was  thus  led  to  work  with  a  space  (frame- 
work) in  which  the  distinction  between  rest  and  motion  is  replaced  by 
a  distinction  between  quiescent  states  and  active  states  (Sees.  1.3.2 
and  1.3.4.1). 

Von  Neumann  then  put  various  restrictions  on  the  space  (frame* 
work)  in  which  he  would  carry  out  his  automata  constructions.  He 
wanted  it  to  have  a  high  degree  of  regularity.  He  required  functional 
homogeneity,  though  not  total  homogeneity,  because  the  latter  is 
incompatible  with  computation  and  construction  (Sec.  1.3.3.2).  He 
^  further  required  isotropy,  and  selected  a  2-dimensional  space  (Sec. 
1.3.3.3).  Because  of  the  difficulties  in  modeling  automata  construction 
in  a  continuous  space,  he  decided  to  work  with  a  discrete  space  (Sec. 
1.3.3.4;  cf.  Sec.  1.1.2.3).  In  sum,  he  decided  to  carry  out  his  automata 
designs  in  a  2-dimensional,  regular,  cellular  structure  which  is  func- 
tionally homogeneous  and  isotropic. 

He  then  decided  to  model  the  growth  of  neurons  (excitable  cells) 
by  the  transformation  of  existing,  unexcitable  cells  into  excitable 
cells.  Such  a  transformation  cannot  be  induced  by  ordinary  stimuli 
(the  ordinary  active  states  of  neurons)  since  these  control  the  logical 
functions.  Hence,  to  accomplish  construction  in  his  cellular  structure 
von  Neumann  introduced  special  stimuli,  which  cause  transitions 
from  the  unexcitable  state  to  different  species  of  excitable  states.  Thus 
growth  is  modeled  by  the  transformation  of  unexcitable  cells  to  ex- 
citable cells  by  special  stimuli  (Sec.  1.3.4.2).  This  distinction  between 
ordinary  and  special  stimuli,  though  modified  later  (Sees.  1.3.4.3, 
2.5,  and  2.6),  is  the  basis  for  an  answer  to  question  (Bl),  Can  an 
automaton  be  constructed  by  another  automaton? 

The  next  question  is  (B2),  What  class  of  automata  can  be  con- 
structed by  a  single  suitable  automaton?  Von  Neumann  referred  to 
the  constructing  and  constructed  automata  as  the  "primary"  and 
"secondary"  automata,  respectively.  In  Section  1.4  he  planned  the 
general  organization  and  mode  of  operation  of  a  primary  automaton 
which  can  construct  any  member  of  some  infinite  class  of  secondary 
automata.  A  description  of  the  desired  secondary  automaton  is  to  be 
given  to  the  primary  automaton.  The  main  problem  concerns  the 
exact  way  this  is  to  be  done.  Since  there  is  no  bound  on  the  size  of  the 
secondary  to  be  constructed  by  a  single  primary,  these  descriptions 
cannot  be  stored  in  the  primary  proper.  Working  with  the  universal 
Turing  machine  in  mind,  von  Neumann  introduced  an  indefinitely 


A I J  TOM  ATA  SELF-REPROD  l  rCTION 


281) 


extendible  linear  array  L,  on  which  the  description  of  any  secondary, 
or  series  of  secondaries  can  be  stored. 

Thus  the  primary  (constructing)  automaton  will  consist  of  a 
finite  part  plus  an  indefinitely  expandible  linear  array  L.  A  construct- 
ing automaton  is  analogous  to  a  Turing  machine,  which  consists  of  a 
finite  automaton  plus  an  indefinitely  expandible  tape.  Indeed,  as  von 
Neumann  noted,  the  linear  array  L  could  also  serve  as  an  indefinitely 
expandible  tape  for  a  Turing  machine  if  the  finite  automaton  part  of 
a  Turing  machine  could  be  embedded  in  the  cellular  structure  (Sec. 
1.4.2.3;  cf.  Sec.  5.1.3).  The  detailed  problem  of  actually  designing,  for 
the  cellular  structure,  finite  automata  which  can  interact  with  the 
linear  array  L  and  carry  out  constructions  and  computations  on  the 
basis  of  the  information  obtained  from  L,  is  solved  in  Sections  3.1 
through  5.2.  Thus,  by  the  end  of  Section  5.2,  question  (B)  has  been 
answered  affirmatively.  Moreover,  question  (A),  as  applied  to  von 
Neumann's  cellular  system,  has  also  been  answered  affirmatively. 

In  the  balance  of  Chapter  1,  von  Neumann  reduced  questions  (C) 
and  (D)  to  question  (B).  He  reduced  question  (C)  to  question  (B) 
by  outlining  a  plan  for  converting  the  primary  (constructing)  autom- 
aton into  a  universal  constructor  (Sec.  1.5).  This  plan  is  illustrated 
in  Figure  50  for  constructions  in  the  first  quadrant.  The  secondary 
automaton  is  a  cells  wide  and  0  cells  high,  and  its  lower  left-hand  cell 
is  located  at  (xi  ,  yi).  Let  I  be  the  number  of  states  that  each  cell  of 
the  secondary  is  to  assume,  and  let  X  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  I  —  1.  The  state 
of  cell  (i,  j)  is  specified  by  A;y ,  where  i  =  0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  a  —  1  and  j  = 
0,  1,  •  •  •  ,  j8  —  1.  Hence  the  plan  of  any  secondary  automaton  may  be 
given  to  the  universal  constructor  by  placing  the  sequence  X\  ,  yi  ,  ex, 
iS,  Aoo ,  •  •  •  ,  Aa-i,,3_i  on  the  tape  L.  The  universal  constructor  can 
construct  the  secondary  on  the  basis  of  the  information  contained  in 
this  sequence.  This  reduces  question  (C)  to  question  (B). 

Von  Neumann  then  reduced  question  (D)  to  question  (C)  by 
showing  how  to  make  the  universal  constructor  reproduce  itself  (Sees. 
1.6,  1.7).  In  essence,  he  accomplished  this  by  placing  a  description  of 
the  universal  constructor  on  its  own  tape  L.  He  discussed  two  interre- 
lated points  in  this  connection. 

First,  there  is  an  apparent  difficulty  in  using  L  for  self -reproduction. 
A  self -reproducing  automaton  must  contain  a  complete  description 
of  itself.  This  might  seem  a  priori  impossible,  on  the  ground  that  the 
constructing  automaton  must  contain  a  complete  plan  of  the  con- 
structed automaton,  and  in  addition  the  ability  to  interpret  and  exe- 
cute this  plan  (Sec.  1.6.1.1;  cf.  pp.  79-80  of  Part  I).  The  difficulty 
is  circumvented  by  designing  the  universal  constructor  so  that  it  uses 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


the  information  on  L  twice;  once  to  construct  a  secondary,  and  once 
to  make  a  copy  of  L  which  is  attached  to  the  secondary  (Sec.  1.6.1.2; 
cf.  pp.  84-87  of  Part  I  and  Sec.  5.3.2  below).  In  this  way,  a  self- 
reproducing  automaton  stores  a  complete  description  of  itself  in  a 
proper  part  of  itself,  namely,  on  the  tape  L  (cf.  Fig.  55).  Likewise, 
an  automaton  which  is  both  a  universal  constructor  and  a  universal 
computer  can  store  a  complete  description  of  itself  in  a  proper  part 
of  itself  (Fig.  56)  n 

The  second  point  about  using  L  in  self -reproduction  concerns  some 
alternatives.  The  universal  constructor  Mc  constructs  a  secondary 
automaton  G  whose  description  £)((?)  is  stored  on  L.  Might  a  univer- 
sal constructor  be  designed  which  could  directly  copy  automaton  G 
itself  (Sec.  1.6.2.3)?  Alternatively,  might  an  automaton  be  designed 
which  could  explore  an  automaton  G  and  construct  its  description 
£)((?)  (Sec.  1.6.3.1)?  Von  Neumann  argued  that  these  alternatives 
would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  carry  out.  In  exploring  one 
part  of  an  active  automaton  (7,  the  exploring  automaton  might  modify 
an  as  yet  unexplored  part  of  G.  More  generally,  the  active  G  might 
actively  interfere  with  the  exploratory  activities  of  the  exploring 
automaton.  This  difficulty  would  be  particularly  acute  in  the  case  of 
self -reproduction.  If  a  universal  constructor  were  to  work  directly 
from  the  secondary  G,  when  the  universal  constructor  attempted 
to  reproduce  itself  it  would  be  trying  to  explore  itself.  Von  Neumann 
thought  such  an  attempt  would  probably  lead  to  paradoxes  of  the 
Richard  type  (Sec.  1.6.3.2).  None  of  these  difficulties  arise  when  the 
universal  constructor  works  with  the  quiescent  description  £>((?) 
(Sec.  1.4.2.1). 

There  is  a  parallel  problem  with  respect  to  the  construction  of  the 
secondary  automaton.  If  part  of  the  secondary  automaton  were 
active  during  construction,  it  could  interfere  with  the  construction 
process.  Von  Neumann  solved  this  problem  by  stipulating  that  the 
initial  state  of  the  secondary  automaton  is  to  be  composed  entirely 
of  quiescent  states  (Sec.  1.7.2.1).  In  terms  of  the  29-state  transition 
function  developed  in  Chapter  2,  this  means  that  the  X*/  are  limited 
to  the  10  values  U,  TMa0  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  and  C0o .  After 
the  secondary  automaton  has  been  completed,  it  may  be  rendered 

11  We  have  already  noted  the  parallelism  between  Turing  machines  and 
constructing  machines.  This  parallelsm  extends  to  the  present  point,  for  a 
Turing  machine  can  contain  a  description  of  itself.  See  C.  Y.  Lee,  "A  Turing 
Machine  Which  Prints  its  Own  Code  Script"  and  James  Thatcher's  "The 
Construction  of  a  Self-Describing  Machine." 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 


2\)\ 


active  by  a  starting  stimulus  injected  into  its  periphery.  We  have 
already  called  such  automata  "initially  quiescent  automata"  (Sec. 
5.1.2). 

Thus  the  class  of  automata  constructible  by  the  universal  con- 
structing automaton  is  a  proper  subclass  of  the  automata  which  can  be 
specified  as  part  of  an  initial  cell  assignment  (i.e.,  at  time  zero)  of 
von  Neumann's  cellular  structure  (Sec.  1.3.3.5).  Actually,  it  is  pos- 
sible to  design  in  the  29 -state  cellular  structure  constructing  automata 
which  could  construct  every  initially  quiescent  automaton  and  many 
active  automata  as  well.  There  is  no  need  to  do  this,  however,  since 
both  the  universal  constructor  and  a  universal  Turing  machine  can 
be  designed  as  initially  quiescent  automata  (Sees.  5.3.2,  5.1.3).  More- 
over, not  all  automata  which  can  be  specified  as  part  of  an  initial  cell 
assignment  of  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure  can  be  constructed 
from  within  the  cellular  structure.  For  example,  the  configuration  of 
Figure  13b  (time  zero)  when  surrounded  by  a  wide  band  of  unexcita- 
ble  cells  U  cannot  be  so  constructed.  A  constructing  arm  can 
construct  the  quiescent  states  Tioo  and  T020 ,  but  after  it  activates 
them  it  cannot  withdraw  from  the  surrounding  area  before  Tioi  and 
T021  kill  each  other.  A  simple  example  of  a  non-constructible  autom- 
aton is  the  3X3  configuration  consisting  of  the  sensitized  state  So 
surrounded  by  cells  in  state  C0o  -12 

This  concludes  our  summary  of  Chapter  1.  To  make  specific  his 
questions  about  automata  construction,  von  Neumann  had  to  choose 
a  particular  cellular  structure.  Chapter  2  is  devoted  to  this  task. 
In  Section  2.1.2  he  selected  a  discrete  temporal  reference  frame  and 
decided  that  the  state  of  a  cell  at  time  t  +  1  will  depend  only  on  its 
own  state  and  the  states  of  its  four  immediate  neighbors  at  time  t. 
In  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  he  developed  a  set  of  29  states  and 
their  transition  rule.  We  refer  to  the  result  as  "von  Neumann's 
29-state  cellular  structure."  It  is  summarized  in  Section  2.8  and 
Figures  9  and  10. 

12  Thatcher,  "Universality  in  the  von  Neumann  Cellular  Model,"  Sec.  2.3. 

Moore,  "Machine  Models  of  Self-Reproduction,"  called  a  configuration 
which  can  exist  only  at  time  zero  a  "Garden-of-Eden"  configuration.  Every 
Garden-of-Eden  configuration  is  non-constructible,  though  not  conversely. 
Moore  established  a  necessary  condition  for  Garden-of-Eden  configurations 
to  exist  in  a  cellular  structure  in  which  information  requires  at  least  1  unit  of 
time  to  pass  from  a  cell  to  its  neighbors.  Myhill,  "The  Converse  of  Moore's 
Garden  of  Eden  Theorem,"  showed  that  this  condition  is  also  sufficient.  This 
condition  is  essentially  that  the  cellular  structure  be  non-backwards  deter- 
ministic in  the  sense  of  Burks  and  Wang,  "The  Logic  of  Automata,"  Sec.  3.3. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


We  now  reformulate  questions  (A)-(D)  so  they  apply  to  von  Neu- 
mann's 29-state  cellular  structure,  at  the  same  time  modifying  them 
somewhat. 

(A)  Logical  universality:  Can  an  initially  quiescent  automaton  which 
performs  the  computations  of  a  universal  Turing  machine  be 
embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure? 

(B)  Constructibility:  Can  an  automaton  be  constructed  by  another 
automaton  within  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure? 

(C)  Construction-universality:  Can  there  be  embedded  in  von  Neu- 
mann's 29-state  cellular  structure  a  universal  constructor  Mc 
with  this  property:  for  each  initially  quiescent  automaton  M, 
there  is  a  coded  description  £>(M)  of  M  such  that,  when  £>(M) 
is  placed  on  a  tape  L  attached  to  Mc  ,  Mc  will  construct  M? 

(D)  Self -reproduction: 

(Dl)  Can  a  self -reproducing  automaton  be  embedded  in  von 

Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure? 
(D2)  Can  there  be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state 

cellular  structure  an  automaton  which  can  perform  the 

computations  of  a  universal  Turing  machine  and  can 

also  reproduce  itself? 
All  these  questions  are  answered  affirmatively  in  the  present  work. 
The  answer  to  the  constructibility  question  (B )  is  given  at  the  end  of 
Section  2.8.3  and  in  Figure  14.  For  each  initially  quiescent  automaton 
(2,,  there  are  two  binary  (stimuli,  no  stimuli)  sequences  which,  when 
fed  into  inputs  i  and  j  of  Figure  14,  will  construct  the  automaton 
These  two  sequences  can  be  produced  by  two  linear  arrays  of  Too* 
cells,  with  the  e's  properly  chosen.  Hence,  these  two  linear  arrays, 
together  with  the  cells  in  columns  A  and  B  of  Figure  14,  will  con- 
struct &.  This  shows  that  for  each  initially  quiescent  automaton  Q 
there  is  an  active  automaton  which  will  construct  it. 

Affirmative  answers  to  the  remaining  questions  are  based  on  the 
constructions  of  Chapters  3  and  4. 

In  Chapter  3  von  Neumann  designed  the  basic  organs  to  be  used. 
Let  i1  •  •  •  in  be  an  arbitrary  finite  binary  sequence,  with  "1"  repre- 
senting a  stimulus  and  "0"  representing  the  absence  of  a  stimulus. 
il  •  •  •  in  represents  an  indefinite  repetition  of  the  sequence  i1  •  • «  in. 
Von  Neumann  developed  design  algorithms  for  arbitrary  pulsers 
P(^i  ...  z,n)j  arbitrary  periodic  pulsers  PP^'1  •  •  •  in)y  and  arbitrary 
decoders  D^'1  %n).  He  designed  two  specific  organs:  the  triple- 
return  counter  <f>  and  the  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  He  concluded 
Chapter  3  with  an  algorithm  which  will  design  an  arbitrary  coded 
channel  or  wire  crossing  device. 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 


Chapter  4  is  devoted  to  the  design  of  the  memory  control  MC. 
MC  reads  and  writes  on  the  tape  L  under  the  direction  of  the  con- 
structing uni+  CU.  A  block  diagram  of  MC  is  given  in  Figure  37; 
the  operation  of  MC  is  outlined  in  Section  4.3.1.  The  basic  operation 
of  reading  cell  xn  of  L,  writing  on  xn  ,  and  changing  the  connection 
to  cell  xn+\  (lengthening)  or  cell  av-i  (shortening)  is  carried  out  in 
two  stages.  First,  when  a  pulse  comes  from  the  output  of  CU  labeled 
"oi"  to  the  input  of  MC  having  this  same  label,  MC  reads  the  cell 
xn  by  means  of  the  connecting  loop  Ci .  If  xn  stores  "zero,"  MC  sends  a 
pulse  to  input  ix  of  CU;  while  if  xn  stores  "one,"  MC  sends  a  pulse  to 
input  i2  of  CU.  Second,  CU  sends  a  pulse  to  input  o2  or  o3  of  MC 
according  as  "zero"  or  "one"  is  to  be  written  in  cell  xn  ;  CU  also  sends 
a  pulse  to  input  o4  or  o6  of  MC  according  as  the  loops  Ci  and  C2 
are  to  be  lengthened  or  shortened.  MC  executes  these  operations,  and 
when  they  are  finished  it  sends  a  pulse  to  input  is  of  CU  signifying 
completion. 

The  parts  of  the  memory  control  MC  are:  the  read-write-erase  unit 
RWE;  the  read-write-erase  control  RWEC;  the  delay  area  W;  the 
transfer  area  Y;  and  the  coded  channel,  consisting  of  the  main  chan- 
nel together  with  X,  Z,  CCi  ,  CC2 ,  and  CC3 . 

Von  Neumann  did  not  quite  complete  the  design  of  MC,  and  what 
he  did  finish  contained  many  errors.  We  have  corrected  all  but  one 
error  as  we  have  gone  along  (Ch.  4  and  Sec.  5.1.1).  This  last  error  is 
corrected  and  the  design  of  MC  is  completed  in  Section  5.1.2.  A 
much  improved  design  of  MC  is  suggested  in  Section  5.2.2. 

The  memory  control  MC,  the  indefinite  linear  array  L,  the  con- 
necting loop  Ci  ,  and  the  timing  loop  C2  together  constitute  a  tape 
unit  with  unlimited  memory  capacity.  Moreover,  MC  is  an  initially 
quiescent  automaton  which  is  started  by  a  stimulus  impinging  on  its 
periphery  (input  Oi).  Hence  an  initially  quiescent  automaton  which 
performs  the  functions  of  a  tape  unit  with  unlimited  memory  capacity 
can  be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure. 

A  Turing  machine  consists  of  such  a  tape  unit  together  with  a 
finite  automaton  which  can  interact  with  this  tape  unit.  In  Section 
5.1.3  we  showed  how  to  simulate  an  arbitrary  finite  automaton  by  an 
initially  quiescent  cellular  automaton.  Combining  these  results  and 
applying  them  to  the  specific  case  of  a  universal  Turing  machine,  we 
obtained  a  positive  answer  to  von  Neumann's  question  (A):  An 
initially  quiescent  automaton  which  performs  the  computation  of  a 
universal  Turing  machine  can  be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's 
29-state  cellular  structure. 

Von  Neumann's  universal  constructor  Mc  consists  of  the  construct- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


ing  unit  CU  combined  with  the  tape  unit  (MC  +  L).  See  Figure  50. 
The  constructing  arm  is  designed  in  Section  5.2.1,  and  the  design  of 
the  constructing  unit  CU  is  sketched  in  Section  5.2.3.  Hence  there  can 
be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular  structure  a  universal 
constructor  Mc  with  this  property:  for  each  initially  quiescent  autom- 
aton M,  there  is  a  coded  description  3D(M)  of  M  such  that,  when 
is  placed  on  a  tape  L  attached  to  Mc ,  Mc  will  construct  M. 

This  answers  von  Neumann's  question  (C)  and  brings  us  to  ques- 
tion (D),  concerning  self -reproduction. 

A  comparison  of  the  universal  computer  Mu  and  the  universal 
constructor  Mc  shows  that  in  von  Neumann's  cellular  structure,  com- 
putation and  construction  are  similar  activities.  Both  Mc  and  Mu 
are  finite  data  processors  which  can  interact  with  an  indefinitely  ex- 
tendible tape.  Suppose  the  universal  computer  Mu  is  designed  to 
write  its  output  answer  on  a  fresh  tape  L.  Then  both  Mu  and  Mc 
produce  initially  quiescent  automata.  The  universal  constructor  Mc 
produces  rectangular  initially  quiescent  automata  based  on  the  10 
states  U,  Tuao  (u  =  0,  1;  a  =  0,  1,  2,  3),  and  Coo  •  The  universal  com- 
puter Mu  produces  a  linear  initially  quiescent  automaton  based  on 
the  two  states  U  and  T03o  ( I  )• 

5.3,2  Self -reproducing  automata.  Our  task  is  now  to  convert  the  uni- 
versal constructor  Mc  of  Section  5.2.3  and  Figure  50  into  a  self-repro- 
ducing automaton. 

Note  first  that  the  universal  constructor  Mc  is  in  fact  an  initially 
quiescent  automaton.  Consequently,  a  description  £>(MC)  can  be 
placed  on  the  tape  L  attached  to  Mc  .  When  this  is  done  and  Mc  is 
started,  the  complex  Mc  +  £)(MC)  will  produce  a  copy  of  Mc  as 
the  secondary  constructed  automaton.  This  is  not  yet  self -reproduc- 
tion, however,  for  the  constructed  automaton  Mc  is  smaller  than  the 
constructing  automaton  Mc  +  3D(MC). 

In  this  case  the  constructing  automaton  is  larger  and,  in  a  sense, 
more  complex  than  the  constructed  automaton  because  the  construct- 
ing automaton  contains  a  complete  plan  £>(MC)  of  the  constructed 
automaton  and,  in  addition,  a  unit  Mc  which  interprets  and  executes 
this  plan  (Sec.  1.6.1.1,  pp.  79-80  of  Part  I).  To  obtain  a  primary 
automaton  which  will  construct  a  secondary  as  large  as  itself,  we 
make  some  modifications  in  the  universal  constructor  Mc  (compare 
Sec.  1.6.1.2  and  pp.  84-86  of  Part  I). 

Let  the  secondary  automaton  to  be  constructed  consist  of  an 
initially  quiescent  automaton  M  together  with  a  tape  L  which  stores 
some  tape  content  3(M)  initially.  See  Figure  54.  Place  the  following 
information  on  the  tape  L  of  the  universal  constructor:  a  period,  the 


AUTOMATA  SELF-REPRODUCTION 




description  3>(Af),  a  second  period,  the  tape  content  3(M),  and  a 
third  period.  As  a  special  case  we  allow  3(M)  and  the  third  period 
to  be  omitted.  It  is  easy  for  the  universal  constructor  to  detect  that 
3(M)  is  omitted  since  3(Af )  is  written  in  a  five-bit  code  that  does  not 
include  the  all-zero  character  (Sec.  5.2.3). 

Now  change  Mc  into  a  modified  universal  constructor  M*  which 
executes  the  following  three  steps.  First,  M*  uses  £>(M)  to  construct 
M,  as  before  (Sees.  5.2.1  and  5.2.3).  Second,  M*  produces  a  tape  L 
attached  to  M  which  stores  a  period,  3(M),  and  a  second  period.  If 
Mc*  finds  that  there  is  nothing  stored  on  its  tape  beyond  the  second 
period  (i.e.,  3(Af)  is  missing),  M*  will  then  copy  a  period,  3)(M), 
and  a  second  period  onto  the  tape  attached  to  M.  Third,  Mc*  will 
give  a  starting  stimulus  to  M. 

The  second  of  these  steps  is  a  simple  tape-copying  operation.  It  can 
be  carried  out  by  the  constructing  unit  CU  and  the  constructing  arm 
in  a  way  analogous  to  the  way  these  organs  construct  M.  The  coding 
is  different  in  the  two  cases,  of  course.  A  cell  (i,  j)  of  M  is  described 
in  3D  (M)  by  a  five-bit  character  which  is  stored  in  five  successive  cells 
of  the  tape  of  Mc*.  In  contrast,  each  cell  of  M's  tape  is  the  same  as  the 
corresponding  cell  of  Mc*'s  tape. 

For  each  choice  of  location  (xx  ,  yx)  of  a  copy  of  M*  there  is  a 
description  £>(MC*).  Place  this  description  £>(MC*)  on  the  tape  of 
Mc  *  itself.  The  complex  Mc  *  +  3D  (Mc  * )  will  construct  Mc  *  +  £>  ( Af c  * ) . 
This  is  self -reproduction.  See  Figure  55. 

Hence,  a  self-reproducing  automaton  can  be  embedded  in  von  Neu- 
mann's 29-state  cellular  structure.  This  answers  question  (Dl). 

Iterated  construction  and  self -reproduction  may  be  achieved  by 
further  modification  of  the  universal  constructor  (Sec.  1.7). 

The  initially  quiescent  automaton  Mu  is  a  universal  Turing  machine 
(Sec.  5.1.3).  Place  the  description  S>(MU  +  Mc*)  on  the  tape  L  of 
Mc*  .  The  primary  automaton  Me*  +  D(Mtt  +  Me*)  will  then 
construct  as  secondary  the  automaton  {Mu  +  Mc*)  +  £>(Mu  + 
Mc*).  In  this  case  the  constructed  automaton  is  larger,  and  in  a 
sense  more  complicated,  than  the  constructing  automaton. 

Next,  attach  Mu  to  M*  as  in  Figure  56.  Place  the  description 
£>(MW  +  Mc*)  on  the  tape  of  Mu  +  Mc*.  The  automaton  (Mu  + 
M*)  +  <£>{MU  +  Mc*)  will  construct  (Mu  +  Mc*)  +  3D(MW  + 
Mc),  and  hence  is  self -reproductive.  After  it  is  completed,  the  second- 
ly (Mu  +  Mc*)  +  3D(MW  +  Mc*)  can  carry  out  a  computation. 
Alternatively,  if  Mu  is  supplied  with  its  own  tape,  each  (Mu  + 
Mc*)  +  £>(MU  +  Mc*)  can  compute  and  construct  simultaneously. 
Hence,  there  can  be  embedded  in  von  Neumann's  29-state  cellular 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


structure  an  automaton  which  can  perform  the  computations  of  a  univer- 
sal Turing  machine  and  can  also  reproduce  itself.  This  answers  question 
(D2). 

All  of  von  Neumann's  questions  about  automata  construction  and 
computation  (Sees.  1.1.2.1  and  5.3.1)  have  now  been  answered 
affirmatively.  His  29-state  cellular  structure  is  computation-universal, 
construction-universal,  and  self-reproductive.  In  this  cellular  struc- 
ture, self -reproduction  is  a  special  case  of  construction,  and  con- 
struction and  computation  are  similar  activities.] 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Birkhoff,  Garrett.  Hydrodynamics,  A  Study  in  Logic,  Fact,  and  Similitude. 
Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,  1950. 

 and  John  von  Neumann.  See  John  von  Neumann. 

Boltzmann,  Ludwig.  Vorlesungen  iiber  Gas  Theorie.  Two  volumes.  Leipzig: 
Johann  Barth,  189G  and  1898. 

 .  Wissenschaftliche  Abhandlungen.  Edited  by  Fritz  Hasenohrl.  Three 

volumes.  Leipzig:  Johann  Barth,  1909. 

Booth,  Andrew  D.  "The  Future  of  Automatic  Digital  Computers."  Com- 
munications of  the  Association  for  Computing  Machines  3  (June,  1960) 
339-341,  360. 

Brainerd,  J.  G.,  and  T.  K.  Sharpless.  "The  ENIAC."  Electrical  Engineering 

67  (Feb.,  1948)  163-172. 
Brillouin,  Leon.  Science  and  Information  Theory.  New  York:  Academic  Press, 

1956. 

Bulletin  of  the  American  Mathematical  Society.  "John  von  Neumann,  1903- 
1957."  Vol.  64,  No.  3,  Part  2,  May,  1958,  129  pages.  This  is  a  memorial 
issue.  Besides  the  articles  by  Ulam  and  Shannon  listed  separately  in  this 
bibliography,  it  contains  articles  on  von  Neumann's  work  in  lattice 
theory,  theory  of  operators,  measure  and  ergodic  theory,  quantum 
theory,  and  theory  of  games  and  mathematical  economics. 

Burks,  Arthur  W.  "Computation,  Behavior,  and  Structure  in  Fixed  and 
Growing  Automata."  Behavioral  Science  6  (1961)  5-22.  Original  version 
and  discussion  in  Self -Organizing  Systems  (edited  by  Marshall  Yovits 
and  Scott  Cameron).  New  York:  Pergamon  Press,  1960,  pp.  282-311, 
312-314. 

 .  "Electronic  Computing  Circuits  of  the  ENIAC."  Proceedings  of  the 

Institute  of  Radio  Engineers  35  (August,  1947)  756-767. 

 .  "Programming  and  the  Theory  of  Automata."  Pp.  100-117  of  Computer 

Programming  and  Formal  Systems,  edited  by  P.  Braffort  and  D.  Hirsch- 
berg.  Amsterdam:  North-Holland  Publishing  Company,  1963. 

 .  "Super  Electronic  Computing  Machine."  Electronic  Industries  5  (July, 

1946)  62-67,  96. 

 .  "Toward  a  Theory  of  Automata  Based  on  More  Realistic  Primitive 

Elements."  Pp.  379-385  of  Information  Processing  1962,  Proceedings  of 
IFIP  Congress  62,  edited  by  C.  M.  Popplewell.  Amsterdam:  North-Hol- 
land Publishing  Company,  1963. 

 and  John  von  Neumann.  See  John  von  Neumann. 

 and  Hao  Wang.  "The  Logic  of  Automata."  Journal  of  the  Association 

for  Computing  Machinery  4  (April,  1957)  193-218  and  4  (July,  1957) 
279-297.  (Reprinted  in  Wang,  Hao,  A  Survey  of  Mathematical  Logic,  pp. 
175-223.  Peking:  Science  Press,  1962.  Distributed  by  North-Holland 
Publishing  Company,  Amsterdam.) 

 and  Jesse  B.  Wright.  "Theory  of  Logical  Nets."  Proceedings  of  the  Insti- 
tute of  Radio  Engineers  41  (October,  1953)  1357-1365.  Reprinted  in  Se- 






THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


quential  Machines — Selected  Papers,  pp.  193-212.  Edited  by  E.  F.  Moore. 

Reading,  Mass.:  Addison  Wesley,  1964. 
Church,  Alonzo.  "Applications  of  Recursive  Arithmetic  to  the  Problem  of 

Circuit  Synthesis/ '  Summaries  of  Talks  Presented  at  the  Summer  Institute 

for  Symbolic  Logic,  Cornell  University,  1957.  Princeton:  Institute  for 

Defense  Analysis,  1960. 
Codd,  Edgar  Frank.  "Propagation,  Computation,  and  Construction  in  Two- 

Dimensional  Cellular  Spaces."  152  pp.  Ph.D.  Dissertation,  University 

of  Michigan,  1965. 

i/  Eccles,  J.  C.  The  Neurophysiological  Basis  of  Mind.  Oxford:  Oxford  Univer- 
sity Press,  1953. 

Estrin,  Gerald.  "The  Electronic  Computer  at  the  Institute  for  Advanced 
Study."  Mathematical  Tables  and  Other  Aids  to  Computation  7  (April, 
1953)  108-114  and  frontispiece. 

Godel,  Kurt,  "tiber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia  Mathematica 
und  verwandter  Systeme  I."  Monatshefte  fur  Mathematik  und  Physik  38 
(1931)  173-198.  (English  translation  by  Elliott  Mendelson  in  The  Un- 
decidable,  edited  by  Martin  Davis,  pp.  4-38.  Hewlett,  New  York:  Raven 
Press,  1965.) 

 .  "On  Undecidable  Propositions  of  Formal  Mathematical  Systems." 

Mimeographed  notes  on  lectures  delivered  at  the  Institute  for  Advanced 
Study,  Princeton,  New  Jersey.  February-May,  1934.  31  pages.  (Re- 
printed as  pp.  39-74  of  The  Undecidable,  above.) 

 .  "tiber  die  Lange  der  Beweise."  Ergebnisse  eines  mathematischen  Kol- 

loquiums,  Heft  7,  pp.  23-24.  (English  translation  by  Martin  Davis  in 
The  Undecidable,  above,  pp.  82-88.) 

Goldstine,  H.  H.,  and  Adele  Goldstine.  "The  Electronic  Numerical  Integrator 
and  Computer  (ENIAC)."  Mathematical  Tables  and  Other  Aids  to  Com- 
putation 2  (July,  1946)  97-110  and  frontispiece. 

 and  John  von  Neumann.  See  John  von  Neumann. 

Goto,  Eiichi.  "The  Parametron,  a  Digital  Computing  Element  which  Utilizes 
Parametric  Oscillation."  Proceedings  of  the  Institute  of  Radio  Engineers 
47  (August,  1959)  1304-1316. 

Hamming,  R.  W.  "Error  Detecting  and  Error  Correcting  Codes."  Bell  Sys- 
tem Technical  Journal  29  (1950)  147-160. 

Hartley,  R.  V.  L.  "Transmission  of  Information."  Bell  System  Technical 
Journal  7  (1928)  535-563. 

Holland,  J.  H.  "Concerning  Efficient  Adaptive  Systems."  Pp.  215-230  of 
Self-Organizing  Systems — 1962.  Edited  by  M.  C.  Yovits,  G.  T.  Jacobi, 
and  G.  D.  Goldstein.  Washington,  D.  C:  Spartan  Books,  1962. 

 .  "Outline  for  a  Logical  Theory  of  Adaptive  Systems."  Journal  of  the 

7  Association  for  Computing  Machinery  9  (July,  1962)  297-314. 

 .  "Iterative  Circuit  Computers."  Proceedings  of  the  1960  Western  Joint 

Computer  Conference,  pp.  259-265.  Institute  of  Radio  Engineers,  1960. 

 .  "Universal  Embedding  Spaces  for  Automata."  To  be  published  in 

Progress  in  Brain  Research,  a  festschrift  for  Norbert  Wiener;  Amsterdam: 
Elsevier  Publishing  Company. 

 .  "A  Universal  Computer  Capable  of  Executing  an  Arbitrary  Number 

of  Sub-Programs  Simultaneously."  Proceedings  of  the  1959  Eastern  Joint 
Computer  Conference,  pp.  108-113.  Institute  of.  Radio  Engineers,  1959. 

Kemeny,  John.  "Man  Viewed  as  a  Machine."  Scientific  American  192  (April, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 




1955)  58-67.  This  is  based  on  von  Neumann's  Vanuxem  Lectures,  de- 
livered at  Princeton  University  in  March,  1953. 
Keynes,  John  Maynard.  A  Treatise  on  Probability.  London:  Macmillan  and 
Co.,  1921. 

Kleene,  S.  C.  Introduction  to  Metamathematics.  New  York:  Van  Nostrand, 
1952. 

 .  " Representation  of  Events  in  Nerve  Nets  and  Finite  Automata."  Pp. 

3-41  of  Automata  Studies,  edited  by  C.  E.  Shannon  and  J.  McCarthy. 
Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,  1956.  (This  appeared  originally 
as  Rand  Corporation  Memorandum  RM-704,  101  pp.,  dated  December 
15,  1951.) 

Laplace,  Marquis  Pierre  Simon  de.  A  Philosophical  Essay  on  Probabilities. 
Translated  by  F.  W.  Truscott  and  F.  L.  Emory.  New  York:  Dover  Pub- 
lications, 1951.  First  French  edition  1814. 

Lee,  C.  Y.  "A  Turing  Machine  Which  Prints  Its  Own  Code  Script."  Pp.  155- 
164  of  Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  Mathematical  Theory  of  Automata, 
New  York,  April,  1962.  Brooklyn,  New  York:  Polytechnic  Press,  1963. 

Metropolis,  N.,  and  Ulam,  S.  "The  Monte  Carlo  Method."  Journal  of  the 
American  Statistical  Association  44  (1949)  335-41. 

McCulloch,  W.  S.,  and  W.  Pitts.  "A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent 
in  Nervous  Activity."  Bulletin  of  Mathematical  Biophysics  5  (1943); 
115-133.  " 

McNaughton,  Robert.  "On  Nets  Made  up  of  Badly  Timed  Elements,  Part  I; 
Slow  but  Perfectly  Timed  Elements."  Mimeographed,  30  pages.  Phila- 
delphia: Moore  School  of  Electrical  Engineering,  University  of  Penn- 
sylvania, 1961. 

Moore,  E.  F.  "Machine  Models  of  Self-Reproduction."  Pp.  17-33  of  Mathe- 
matical Problems  in  the  Biological  Sciences.  Proceedings  of  Symposia  in 
Applied  Mathematics,  Vol.  XIV.  Providence,  Rhode  Island:  American 
Mathematical  Society,  1962. 

Morgenstern,  Oskar,  and  John  von  Neumann.  See  John  von  Neumann. 

Myhill,  John.  "The  Converse  of  Moore's  Garden-of-Eden  Theorem."  Pro- 
ceedings of  the  American  Mathematical  Society  14  (August,  1963)  685-686. 

Nyquist,  H.  "Certain  Factors  Affecting  Telegraph  Speed."  Bell  System  Tech- 
nical Journal  3  (1924)  324-346. 

Rajchman,  J.  A.  "The  Selectron — A  Tube  for  Selective  Electrostatic  Stor- 
age." Mathematical  Tables  and  Other  Aids  to  Computation  2  (October, 
1947)  359-361  and  frontispiece. 

Richard,  Jules.  "Les  principes  des  math&natiques  et  le  probleme  des  en- 
sembles." Revue  generate  des  sciences  pures  et  appliquees  16  (1905)  541- 
543. 

Russell,  Bertrand.  "Mathematical  Logic  as  Based  on  the  Theory  of  Types." 

American  Journal  of  Mathematics  30  (1908)  222-262. 
Shannon,  C.  E.  "A  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication."  Bell  System 

Technical  Journal  27  (1948)  379-423,  623-656.  (Reprinted  in  C.  E. 

Shannon  and  W.  Weaver,  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication, 

pp.  3-91.  Urbana:  University  of  Illinois  Press,  1949.) 
 .  "Von  Neumann's  Contributions  to  Automata  Theory."  Bulletin  of  the 

American  Mathematical  Society,  Vol.  64,  No.  3,  Part  2,  May,  1958,  pp. 

123-129. 

Szilard,  L.  "Uber  die  Entropieverminderung  in  einem  thermodynamischen 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


System  bei  Eingriffen  intelligenter  Wesen."  Zeitschrift  fur  Physik  53 
(1929)  840-856.  (English  translation  by  Anatol  Rapoport  and  Mech- 
thilde  Knoller,  "On  the  Decrease  of  Entropy  in  a  Thermodynamic  Sys- 
tem by  the  Intervention  of  Intelligent  Beings."  Behavioral  Science  9 
(October,  1964)  301-310.) 

Tarski,  Alfred.  "The  Concept  of  Truth  in  Formalized  Languages."  Pp.  152- 
278  of  Logic,  Semantics,  M  etamathematics  (translated  by  J.  H.  Woodger) ; 
Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1956.  (Original  Polish  version  1933, 
German  translation  1936.) 

Thatcher,  James.  "The  Construction  of  a  Self-Describing  Turing  Machine." 
Pp.  165-171  of  Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  Mathematical  Theory  of 
Automata,  New  York,  April,  1962.  Brooklyn,  New  York:  Polytechnic 
Press,  1963. 

 .  "Universality  in  the  von  Neumann  Cellular  Model."  100  pp.  Technical 

Report  03105-30-T,  ORA,  University  of  Michigan,  1965.  To  be  pub- 
lished in  Essays  on  Cellular  Automata,  edited  by  A.  W.  Burks. 

Turing,  A.  M.  "The  Chemical  Basis  of  Morphogenesis."  Philosophical  Trans- 
actions of  the  Royal  Society  of  London.  Series  B,  Biological  Sciences,  Vol. 
237,  August,  1952,  pp.  37-72. 

 .  "Computability  and  X-Definability."  The  Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic  2 

(Dec,  1937)  153-163. 

 .  "On  Computable  Numbers,  With  an  Application  to  the  Entscheidungs- 

problem."  Proceedings  of  the  London  Mathematical  Society,  Series  2,  42 
(1936-37)  230-265.  "A  Correction,"  Ibid.,  43  (1937)  544-546.  (Reprinted 
in  The  Undecidable,  edited  by  Martin  Davis,  pp.  115-154,  Hewlett,  New 
York:  Raven  Press,  1965.) 

Ulam,  S.  M.  A  Collection  of  Mathematical  Problems.  New  York,  Interscience 
Publishers,  Inc.,  1960. 

 .  "Electronic  Computers  and  Scientific  Research."  Pp.  95-108  of  The 

Age  of  Electronics.  Edited  by  C.  F.  J.  Overhage.  New  York:  McGraw- 
Hill,  1962. 

 .  "John  von  Neumann,  1903-1957."  Bulletin  of  the  American  Mathemati- 
cal Society,  Vol.  64,  No.  3,  Part  2,  May,  1958,  pp.  1-49.  This  contains 
valuable  biographical  information,  a  summary  account  of  von  Neumann's 
accomplishments,  and  a  bibliography. 

 .  "On  Some  Mathematical  Problems  Connected  with  Patterns  of  Growth 

of  Figures."  Pp.  215-224  of  Mathematical  Problems  in  the  Biological 
Sciences.  Proceedings  of  Symposia  in  Applied  Mathematics,  Vol.  14, 
Providence,  Rhode  Island:  American  Mathematical  Society,  1962. 

 .  "Random  Processes  and  Transformations."  Proceedings  of  the  Interna- 
tional Congress  of  Mathematicians,  1950,  Vol.  II,  pp.  264-275.  Providence, 
Rhode  Island:  American  Mathematical  Society,  1952. 

John  von  Neumann — Collected  Works.  Six  volumes.  Edited  by  A.  H.  Taub. 
New  York:  Macmillan,  1961-63.  Vol.  V  is  entitled  Design  of  Computers, 
Theory  of  Automata  and  Numerical  Analysis.  References  to  these  volumes 
will  be  made  as  follows:  ''Collected  Works  5.288-328"  refers  to  pp.  288^- 
328  of  Vol.  V. 

von  Neumann,  John.  The  Computer  and  the  Brain.  With  a  preface  by  Klara 
von  Neumann,  pp.  v-x.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  1958.  This 
manuscript  was  prepared  during  1955  and  1956  for  the  Silliman  Lectures 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


of  Yale  University,  but  von  Neumann  was  never  able  to  deliver  the  lec- 
tures and  never  completed  the  manuscript. 

 .  First  Draft  of  a  Report  on  the  EDVAC.  Contract  No.  W-670-ORD-4926, 

between  the  United  States  Army  Ordnance  Department  and  the  Univer- 
sity of  Pennsylvania.  Pp.  x  +  101  (double  spaced)  with  22  figures  and  a 
table  explaining  the  order  code.  Mimeographed.  Moore  School  of  Elec- 
trical Engineering,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  June  30,  1945.  An  earlier 
typed  version  had  more  material.  Both  versions  are  incomplete,  lacking 
many  cross  references  and  terminating  with  the  exposition  of  the  order 
code.  But  the  logical  design  is  essentially  complete  except  for  the  control 
and  the  input  and  output  organs. 

 .  "The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata."  Pp.  1-41  in  Cerebral 

Mechanisms  in  Behavior — The  Hixon  Symposium,  edited  by  L.  A. 
Jeffress.  New  York:  John  Wiley,  1951.  Collected  Works  5.288-328.  The 
paper  was  read  on  September  20,  1948.  Von  Neumann's  comments  on 
other  papers  are  on  pp.  58-63,  96,  109-111,  132,  and  232  of  Cerebral 
Mechanisms  in  Behavior. 

 .  M athematische  Grundlagen  der  Quanlenniechanik.  Berlin:  Springer,  1932. 

(English  translation  by  Robert  Beyer,  Princeton  University  Press,  1955.) 

 .  "Non-Linear  Capacitance  or  Inductance  Switching,  Amplifying  and 

Memory  Devices. "  Collected  Works  5.379-419.  This  is  the  basic  paper 
for  United  States  Patent  2,815,488,  filed  April  28,  1954,  issued  December 
3,  1957. 

 .  "Probabilistic  Logics  and  the  Synthesis  of  Reliable  Organisms  from 

Unreliable  Components."  Pp.  43-98  of  Automata  Studies,  edited  by  C.  E. 
Shannon  and  J.  McCarthy.  Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,  1956. 
Collected  Works  5.329-378.  This  paper  is  based  on  notes  taken  on  five 
lectures  given  by  von  Neumann  at  the  California  Institute  of  Technology 
in  January,  1952,  which  were  issued  in  a  mimeographed  edition. 

 .  "Quantum  Logics  (Strict-  and  Probability-  Logics)."  Written  in  about 

1937.  Collected  Works  4.195-197. 

 .  Remarks  in  the  discussion  of  Ralph  Gerard's  "Some  of  the  Problems 

Concerning  Digital  Notions  in  the  Central  Nervous  System."  In  Cyber- 
netics, edited  by  H.  von  Foerster,  pp.  19-31.  New  York,  Josiah  Macy, 
Jr.  Foundation,  1951.  This  is  the  transactions  of  a  conference  held  in 
March,  1950. 

 .  Review  of  Norbert  Wiener's  Cybernetics,  or  Control  and  Communication 

in  the  Animal  and  the  Machine.  Physics  Today  2  (1949)  33-34. 

 .  "Zur  Theorie  der  Gesellschaftspiele,"  Mathematische  Annalen  100  (1928) 

295-320.  Collected  Works  6.1-26. 

 ,  and  Garrett  Birkhoff.  "The  Logic  of  Quantum  Mechanics."  Annals  of 

Mathematics  37  (1936)  823-843.  Collected  Works  4.105-125. 

 ,  Arthur  Burks,  and  H.  H.  Goldstine.  Preliminary  Discussion  of  the 

Logical  Design  of  an  Electronic  Computing  Instrument.  Part  I  of  a  report 
on  the  mathematical  and  logical  aspects  of  an  electronic  computing  in- 
strument prepared  on  Contract  W-36-034-ORD-7481  for  the  Ordnance 
Department  of  the  United  States  Army.  42  pp.  Princeton:  Institute  for 
Advanced  Study,  1946.  Second  edition,  1947,  pp.  vi  +  42.  Collected 
Works,  5.34-79. 

 ,  and  H.  H.  Goldstine.  Planning  and  Coding  of  Problems  for  an  Electronic 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Computing  Instrument.  Part  II  of  a  report  on  the  mathematical  and 
logical  aspects  of  an  electronic  computing  instrument  prepared  on  Con- 
tract W-36-034-ORD-7481  for  the  Ordnance  Department  of  the  United 
States  Army.  Princeton:  Institute  for  Advanced  Study.  Vol.  1,  pp.  iv  -f 
69,  1947.  Vol.  2,  pp.  iv  +  68,  1948.  Vol.  3,  pp.  hi  +  23,  1948.  Collected 
Works  5.80-235. 

 and  Oskar  Morgenstern.  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behavior.  Prince- 
ton: Princeton  University  Press,  1944.  2nd  ed.,  Princeton,  1947;  3rd  ed., 
Princeton,  1953. 

Wiener,  Norbert.  Cybernetics,  or  Control  and  Communication  in  the  Animal 

and  the  Machine.  New  York:  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc.,  1948.  2nd  ed.,  with 

additions,  New  York,  1961. 
Wigington,  R.  L.  "A  New  Concept  in  Computing."  Proceedings  of  the  Institute 

of  Radio  Engineers  47  (April,  1959)  516-523. 
Wilkes,  M.  V.  Automatic  Digital  Computers.  London:  Methuen  &  Co.,  Ltd., 

1956. 

 .  "Progress  in  High-Speed  Calculating  Machine  Design."  Nature  164 

(August  27,  1949)  341-343. 
Williams,  F.  C.  "A  Cathode-Ray  Tube  Digit  Store."  Proceedings  of  the  Royal 

Society  of  London,  Series  A,  Vol.  195  (22  December  1948)  279-284. 


FIGURES 


FIGURES 




Fig.  1.  Neural  network  in  which  dominance  is  not  transitive 


306  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


0     I      I     0     I     0    0     I      I  0 

Fig.  2.  A  binary  tape  constructed  from  rigid  elements 


+  neuron:  ^  _^  © — *~c 

•   neuron*.  J  ^  Q — ^.  c 
—  neuron:  a  — -  © — 

Fig.  3.  The  basic  neurons 


<*  ab~® — -« 


FIGURES 




-o  o  o- 

-o  X  o- 


(a)  Nearest  (O)  and  next  nearest 
neighbors  of  X 


• 

o 

• 

o 

X 

o 

• 

o 

• 

(b)  Unit  vectors 


(c)  Nearest  ( O )  and  next  near- 
est (•)  neighbors  of  X 


Fig.  4.  The  quadratic  lattice 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(a) 

Too 

Too 

Too 

Too 

Too 

(b) 

T.o 

T.o 

T.O 

T.O 

(a) 

(b') 

t 

t 

t 

t 

t 

(c) 

T20 

T20 

T20 

T20 

T20 

(d) 

T30 

T30 

T30 

T30 

T30 

(c) 

Fig.  5.  Ordinary  transmission  states 


FIGURES 




(e) 

Too 

Too 

Too 

T50 

vf ) 

T30 

T20 

T20 

T20 

T 

T 

T 

T30 

T 

Too 

Too 

Too 

Too 

(e1) 

J 

(f') 


I 


I 

(g) 


t 

t 

t 

Fig.  5.  Part  two 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


c 

t 

t 

t 

(a)  Achievement  of  a  •  neuron  by 
using  confluent  states 


c 

* 

( b)  Achievement  of  a  split  line 
by  using  confluent  states 


Fig.  6.  Confluent  states 


FIGURES 


i 









t 

t 

( 

r 

- 

- 

- 

- 

t 



Fig.  7.  Organization  of  an  area 




B 

t 

A 

P 

t 

* 

f- 

t 

t 

Fig.  8.  The  need  for  both  even  and  odd  delays 


S 


o3 




S3 

a 

o 
O 


Symbol 


U 


C€€, 


e  =  0  (quiescent) 
e  =  1  (excited) 


e'  =  0  (next  quiescent) 
€r  =  1  (next  excited) 


to 


Toae 




Tiae 


Tl 




C7ass: 
w  =  0  (ordinary) 
u  =  1  (special) 


Excitation: 

e  =  0  (quiescent) 
e=l  (excited) 


Output  direction: 
a  =  0  (right) 

a  =  1  (up) 
a  =  2  (left) 
a  =  3  (down) 


Summary  of  transition  rule 


Direct  process  changes  U  into  sen- 
sitized states   and   then  into 
Tuao  or  Coo- 
Reverse  process  kills  Tttae  or  C<e' 
into  U. 


Receives  conjunctively  from  T0a« 
directed  toward  it;  emits  with 
double  delay  to  all  Tuat  not 
directed  toward  it. 

Killed  to  U  by  Tiai  directed  to- 
ward it;  killing  dominates 
reception. 


Receives  disjunctively  from  T0a« 
directed  toward  it  and  from 
C€e'j  emits  in  output  direction 
with  single  delay 

(a)  to  Tea*  not  directed  to- 
ward it  and  to  Ct€' 

(b)  to  U  or  sensitized  states 
by  direct  process 

(c)  to  kill    Tiae  by  reverse 
process. 

Killed  to  U  by  Tiai  directed  to- 
ward it;  killing  dominates  re- 
ception. 


Receives  disjunctively  from  Tiat 
directed  toward  it  and  from 
C€€'j  emits  in  output  direction 
with  single  delay 

(a)  to  Tiae  not  directed  to- 
ward it 

(b)  to  U  or  sensitized  states 
by  direct  process 

(c)  to  kill   T0««  or   Cee'  by 
by  reverse  process. 

Killed  to  U  by  T0ai  directed  to- 
ward it;  killing  dominates  re- 
ception. 


Si 


These  are  intermediary  states  in 
the  direct  process.  Tuai  directed 
toward  U  converts  it  to  S$. 
Thereafter,  Sz  is  followed  by 

(a)  Szi  if  some  Tttai  is  di- 
rected toward  the  cell 

(b)  Sso  otherwise, 

until  the  direct  process  termi- 
nates in  a  Tuao  or  CCo.  See 
Figure  10. 


Fig.  9.  The  29  states  and 


their  transition  rule 


FIGURES 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


u 

u 

C€€' 

T00€ 

u 

\f 


mm 


Mil 


b  b 
(a)  Realization  of  /"(/+3)  =  [a{f)  +  £(/+!)] 


u 

U 

T00€ 

U 

T0I€ 

to 


d  d 
(b)  Realization  of  ?(/+3)=  [c{f)-d{f)] 


u 

V 

T00€ 

C€€' 

To.e 

U 

T,3« 

u 

w 

Wa 

to 

to 

c 

to 

W/, 


w 

J 

(c)  Conversion  of  ordinary  stimuli  into  special  stimuli 
by  confluent  states,  and  wire  -  branching 


Fig.  11.  Illustrations  of  transmission  and  confluent  states 


FIGURES 




A 

B 

C 

D 

A 

B 

C 

D 

/ 

Tooo 

rooo 

u 

/ 

Tooo 

coo 

T00l 

u 


Toio 

T020 

Time  0 


Toio 

T 


Time  1 

A 

B 

C 

A 

B 

C 

Z? 


Tooo 

coo 

Tooo 


T00l 

coo 

Tooo 

so 


T020 

Time  2 


Toio 

T020 

Time  3 

A 

B 

C 

D 

A 

C 

D 


Tooo 

co. 

Tooo 

soo 



c.o 

Tooo 

sooo 


Toio 

T020 

Time  4 


Toio 

T020 

r//776»  5 

A 

B 

C 

Z7 

A 

B 

C 

Z? 


^00 

c 


T 


Tooo 


Tooo 

Coo 

T 


Tooi 


Toio 

T02l 

Time  6 


T 

on 

T020 

77>77e  7 

Fig.  12.  Illustration  of  the  direct  process 


316  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 

Time  O  Time  / 


u 

u 

u 

u 

u 

T.0I 

Coo 

u 

u 

u 

u 

u 

? 

? 


TI00 

U 

? 

? 


P 

? 

(a) Special  transmission  state  killing  a  confluent  state. 


Time  0 


Time  I 


u 

u 

u 

U 

u 

TIO« 

T02l 

u 

u 

u 

U 

u 

(b)  Special  and  ordinary  transmission  states  killing  each  other. 


ABC 


ABC 


Tooo 

Tooo 

Tooo 

T.IO 

c 

Time  0 

A 

B 

c 

TOOI 

Tooi 

Tooo 

Tlll 

b  / 


a 


b  I 


TOOI 

Tooo 

Tooo 

c 

Time  1 

A 

B 

C 

Tooo 

u 

TOOI 

b  I 


b  I 


Time  2 


c 

Time  3 


(c  )  Killing  dominates  reception  but  not  emission. 

Fig.  13.  Examples  of  the  reverse  process 


FIGURES 


3K 


A 

B 

C 

D 



C 

Z? 

A 


/ 


U 

jo 


u 

u 

u 


JO 



tl 

u 


c 


A 

_0 

c 

(a) 
A 


A 

c 

(b) 


B 

C 

D 

A 

£ 


/ 
/ 

u 

»i 

c 

j 

A 

c 

(c) 

4? 

BCD 


A    B     C  D 


i\ 



/ 

i\ 


/ 

u 

u 


u 

u 

u 


fl 

c 


tl 

c 


A 

C 

(d) 


A 

0. 

c 

(e) 


Produces 
Fig.  14b 


Produces 
Fig.  I4d 


Into  /     i  o  o  oo  i  o  oooiotoi  i  i  r  0  0  0000000001  10  00  0  ? 


Into  /:    OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIIOIIIIOII  10  00  000010 

 '  V 


Y  

Produces 
Fig.  14c 


Produces 
Fig.l4e 


Fig.  14.  Procedure  for  modifying  a  remote  cell  and  returning  the  construct- 
ing path  to  its  original  unexcitable  state 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 







£ 

C 


C 


c 

(a)  P(lll) 


A 

B 

c 

D 

E 

F 






\b  1 

to 

// 

to 

c 


to 

to 


to 


to 

''A 

to 

to 



to 


to 

to 


to 

to 


to 




c 


c 


c 


(b)  P(IOOIOOOI) 


Fig.  15.  Two  pulsers 


FIGURES 












u 

TO 

TO 

TO 

TO 

u-J 

to 

TO 

TO 

to 


TO 

TO 

TO 

to 

J 

TO 

TO 

TO 

to 

C 


C 


C 



-♦ 

C 

J 


J 

k 

(a) 


u 
u-1 




Ni 


0  j  c 


old  a 




N2 


N3 


2  3 


(b) 

Fig.  16.  Design  of  a  pulser 


\b 


N. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


U 

u-1 




Nh 


(c) 


sk-l 





to 

To 

(d) 

u 

to 

u 

to 

u 

to 

u 

to 

(f ) 


u+2 


(g) 


Fig.  16.  Part  two 


FIGURES 




A  B 


C  D 


E  F   G  H 


PI 



11+ 


y 

; 

/ 

c 

to 

V/////////////////////////////////////// 


to 

b'\ 



c 

to 

> 

to 


to 

c 

p 

// 

p 

(IC 

QIC 

)00 

1) 


JO 

////// //// 











o  lo 



(a)    Periodic  Pulser  PP(IOOIOOOI) 

B  C  D  E 


°-\ 










o 

o 




c 




P( 

\\\ 

H) 

b'\ 



I 

\*3 

"A 

\°' 

c 


(  b)  Special  Periodic  Pulser  PP  {]) 
Fig.  17.  Two  periodic  pulsers 


\b4 





THEOKY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 




to 


4- 

b2 


i.0) 



-+ 



-♦ 


to 


4— 



4- 

/ 


1-1  J? 

c 



iO 

to 



4- 


4- 

4- 

/ 


J-l  J? 

(b) 


c 


-* 



to 



c 

/    2               J-l  J 

(c) 


(d) 




c 


-* 


-4> 


to 


4- 


4- 

X 

(e) 


/-// 


b'b2 


b  b 

1  2 


\ 



-> 

c 

u 

to 


u\2  Pf/'-'/V 

u 

to 


u 

X 


4- 

^  —  1  2  k  * 

♦ 

I 

J 


(f) 


Fig.  18.  Design  of  a  periodic  pulser:  initial  construction 


FIGURES 


b 
\ 


~2      P  (FT)  (order  5p) 

|L   J  0p  ^ 




u 

u 

u 

u   u   u  n 


(h) 


a_—  a 


(i) 

Fig.  18.  Part  two 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


b* 
t 


i 
i 




i 

♦ 

I 
l 
l 
I 

u+2 

i 
i 
I 
i 
i 

^_  i 

i 
i 

\ 

(j) 


•  4  "A 


(k) 


Fig.  18.  Part  three 


~r 

i 
i 
i 
i 
l 

u 


u 

u 

u 

u 

u 





-> 


to 

u 

u 

u 

u 

to 

to 


TO 


iO 
iO 


u+2 


(a) 


to 
to 


"J 


to 
to 
u 

iO 
+0 


I 
I 
I 

u+2 
i 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
i 
I 


(b) 


Fig.  19.  Design  of  a  periodic  pulser:  equalization  of  delays 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


t 


_  1 


2k+4 

t 

I 

J  1 


.  1 

u+5 

! 

:  . 

.AJ 
I 

* 

l 
I 

♦ 

(c) 





 J0p  +  3  

1  (In  -*- 

t 

l 

i 


| 

u+5 

.  ! 

i 

! 

/+J 


i 


t 

(d) 

b 


b 


Fig.  19.  Part  two 


FIGURES 


:i27 






 M+3  

 M  * 

I 


.  1 

.  1 

u+5 

■  1 

\ 

1  ■ 


t 

i 

I 

(e) 

(f) 

Fig.  19.  Pari  three 








— > 

-* 

u 

u 

u 

u 

u 

u 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(g) 


(h) 


Fig.  19.  Part  four 


FIGURES 


A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 



c 


c 


c 


c 


c 


c 

/ 

i 

i 










to 

(1 














c 

b3 


c 


c 


c 


c 


c 


 < 



to 


Fig.  20.  Alternate  periodic  pulser  I>P(1) 


A 

B 

c 

D 

E 

F 

C 


c 


c 

\b  1 


to 

to 

to 


c 

to 

to 



to 

to 

to 


to 


y//< 

to 

to 



to 


to 

to 


to 


to 


to 


0_ 

to 


to 

to 


to 


to 


to 


c 


c 


c 


Fig.  21.  Decoding  organ  D (10010001) 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 




b3 

\ 

J 


i 

c 


c 


c 


— ► 


c 

u 

to 

TO 

TO 

TO 

u-1 

To 

TO 

TO 

TO 


To 

TO 

TO 

To 


To 

TO 

TO 

TO 

c 


C 


C 



C 



J 

k 

(a) 

Fig.  22.  Design  of  a  decoder 


FIGURES 


i    i  t 


u  c 


— ♦ 

c 


— ♦ 

c 



— ♦ 

c 

*; 

N3 

0^  c 

JO 

c 


— ► 

c 

0^ 

0^ 

c 

/  1  2  3 
old  a 


(b) 


(0 


Fig.  22.  Part  two 


332  THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUC1  NO  AUTOMATA 


A    B    C    D   E   F  G  H    I  J 


Fig.  23.  Triple-return  counter  <l> 


FIGURES 




Fig.  24.  Design  of  triple-return  counter  <f> 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


FTGTJRES 




ABCDEFGHIJ 


Fig.  25.  1  vs.  10101  discriminator  ^ 


A    B  C   D   E  F  G    H    I    JKLMNOPORS  T 


Fig.  26.  Recognizer  R (101001) 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Fig.  27.  A  coded  channel 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Fig.  28.  Part  two 


FIGURES 




Fig.  28.  Part  three 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Fig.  29.  Pulsers  and  decoders  of  a  coded  channel 




Fig.  30.  Cyclicity  in  a  coded  channel 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


MC 


X2 

X 

X 

xo 

n-l 

n. 

J 

(a) 


n 


»!fl 


* 

ot 

ot 

Ot 


Xo 

X  . 
n-l 

xn 
n 

r 




to 


•4- 

4- 

4- 

.J 


(b) 


Fig.  31.  The  linear  array  L,  the  connecting  loop  Ci  ,  and  the  timing  loop  C2 


FIGURES 


r 


wi\ 


.J 


»  I 


(c) 




c 

/  \ 






*0 

X  4 
n-1 

A- 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 

(d) 


K+1 


Fig.  31.  Part  two 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


"A 





-> 


— ► 


i 

Xi 

X2 

X 
n-1 

n 

/7+i 


4- 


4— 


4- 

to 

H 




. 


— ► 



4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 

VA 


UA 


w2\ 


it 


it 


(e) 


(f) 



ot 



— # 

a 

*i 

X 
n-1 

X 
n 

X 
n+t 

*0 

X2 



to 


4- 


4- 


4— 

to 




-♦ 


AO 



4- 




4- 

4— 

4— 

Fig.  31.  Part  three 


u2 


w2 


wP\ 


c 

1  4 

f\ 

u 





— ► 

u 


4— 


4- 


4- 


4- 


/7-i 

n 

(a) 

c 

♦  1 



— ► 



i 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 




n-1 

/7 

v2\ 

w2\ 


w2 


(b) 


c 






— ► 


— ► 

U 





4- 

4- 

4- 

4— 




n-1 

n 

n+1 

(0 


c 



— ► 



-* 


-> 




4- 


4— 


4- 



4- 


4- 

4- 



/?-/ 

n 

n+i 

(d) 

4.1 







-¥ 

-♦ 



4- 


4— 


4- 


4- 


4- 

(9 

J 

n-1 

n 

n+1 

(e) 


Fig.  32.  Lengthening  the  timing  loop  C2 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


1  c 
il 

1  o 

■  — ► 



-4 


-4 

iO 

x2 

x  4 

n-J 

iO 

A-  . 

1  o 

1  4- 


4- 


4- 



4— 

1  c 
il 

(a) 

|  1 


-4 


-4 


-4 

iO 

X2 

X„-j 

1  o 



4- 



4- 

r 

(b) 



c 
il 



—4 


-4 


—4 

il  1  i 

x  , 


4- 


4- 


4- 


1  10 

■  -»  '  «-  1 

*4 


(c) 


c 

a 


-4 

il 

I 



-4 


-4 

Xj 

x2 

x„-i 

il 

X„,i 


4- 


4- 


4- 


1  1 
-* 


4- 


4- 

r 

(d) 


Fig.  33.  Lengthening  the  connecting  loop  Ci 


FIGURES 




C1 

0  10 


0  I  0 

«-  '  *- 


(e) 


c 


— » 


1^ 


— ► 


— » 

u 

X2 

Xn-i 

iO 

to 

to 


4- 

to 

to 


4— 

c 

(f) 


c 
ii 


— ► 





-4> 

iO 

ci 

X2 



4- 


4- 

to 

to 

to 


r. 

(g) 


c 
il 



-*• 


-*• 



— ► 

iO 

Xo 

XJ 

X2 

iO 

Xn+J 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4— 


4- 


4— 

(h) 


Fig.  33.  Part  two 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


v2 
w2 


"2\ 


c 

li 




-4 

l 

-> 

iO 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 




n-i 

(a) 

c 



— ► 


i 


-4 


4— 


4- 


4- 


u 

i 



(b) 

c 



-4 


-4 


-4 


-4 


4— 


4- 


4- 


u 





n-J 

n 

(c) 


Fig.  34.  Shortening  the  timing  loop  C2 


FIGURES 


3  19 


U2 


c 

il 





— • 

U 


4- 


4- 


4- 


*-  1 

u 


C2 




n-J 

n 

n+I 

(d) 


c 
il 



— » 


-* 



U  I 

to 

to 

to 

to 

— 1 

U  I 

-  J 

n-2  n-1    n   n  +1 


(e) 


c 

SI 




-* 

iO 


4- 


4- 


4- 


4- 

^1 


i 


...  n-2 

/7-i 

(f) 


c 
a 





—* 




4— 


4- 




n-2  n-i 

(g) 

Fig.  34.  Part  two 


c 

Li 




-> 



y 

*  , 

n-1 

o 

4— 


4- 



4- 


4~ 

c 

(a) 


c 



— ► 




xo 

XJ 



4- 



4- 


4- 

1  1 

U 

r. 

(b) 


c 




— ► 


0  4i 

*0 



4" 


4- 


4- 

0  1  u 

«-  1 

n+1 


(c) 






0  40 


0  1  u 


(d) 


Fig.  35.  Shortening  the  connecting  loop  Ci 


c 
a 


— » 



— ► 


— » 

iO 

X, 

X„-j 

iO 

Xn+1 



*- 



«- 

u 

c 
il 

(e) 


l 



u 

*i 

** 

X„-j 

iO 




4- 


«- 

u 

c 
il 

If) 





-* 


-♦ 

-  -1 

u 

Xo 

Xj 

x2 

x„-2 

X  4 

iO 


4- 




4- 

u 

1  c 

il 

(g) 

c 


1  5 




iO 

Xj 

*> 


X„+j 

1  o 



4- 


4- 

c. 

(h) 

Fig.  35.  Part  two 


u 
i 




T 


*,_,U0  IX 


n-l 


n+J 


(a) 


l  11 


(b) 


c 

ot 



-> 


-♦ 


n 

u 

*0 

Xj 

X„-i 

u 

to 



«- 



«- 


ci 

C 
ii 

(c) 




— ► 


— * 



c. 

u 



4- 


♦- 


4- 



(d) 


Fig.  36.  Writing  "zero"  in  cell  xn  of  the  linear  array  L  when  lengthening  Ci 


FIGURES 




Inputs  to  and  Outputs  from  CU 


/ 


\ 


cc„ 


RWEC 

(Lengthening) 


PP(1) 

(Write  0) 


PP(1) 

(Write  1) 


RWEC 

(Shortening) 


PP(1) 

(WriteO) 

1  PP(j) 

[(Write  1) 


cc 


V////////////////////A 


vri\ 


w 

(Delay  Area) 


1  P(IOIOI) 


si 


RWE 


c 
ii 

Pi 

o 

g 



iO 

Xo 

Xn-i 

^  






<: 

C 
H 





c2 






Memory  Control  MC 


Fig.  37.  Tape  unit  with  unlimited  memory  capacity. 
Note:  the  various  organs  and  units  are  not  drawn  to  scale. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


/   5  +  1 

(e  = 


-1) 




Inject  the  sequence  10101  at  v\. 


Wi  — * 

a  of  ^. 

(in  =  0) 

6  of 

h. 

(in  =  1) 

c  of  ^  — > 

12. 

(i'»+1  =  0) 

02  — > 

Starts  a0. 

ttn+1  =  1) 

03  ~* 

Starts  «i. 

=  1) 

04  -> 

(28,.a)-(28,.d) 

(29'.a)-(29'.d) 
I 


(ao  active.) 

I 

Stops  ao- 

(29'.e')-(29'.h') 


(ai  active.) 

i 

Stops  ai. 
(29'.e)-(29'.g) 




(30'.a)-(30'.g) 
(31'.a)-(31'.c) 
I 


(ao  active.) 
I 

Stops  ao. 

(31'.d') 


(ai  active.) 
i 

Stops  OL\. 

(31\d) 


(31'.e)-(31'.h) 
4. 

Fig.  38.  The  logical  structure  of  the  procedure 
followed  by  the  memory  control  MC. 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Fig.  39.  Read-write-erase  unit  RWE.  (b)  Lower  part  of  RWE.  Note: 
parts  (a)  and  (b)  of  Figure  39  constitute  one  continuous  drawing. 


FIGURES 




To  triple-return  counter 
input  {$-0  or  $  -0)  of 
RWE  2 


From  triple-return  counter 


output  ifyb  or^-^ofRWE 


This  goes  via  delay  area  W 
to  start  a  periodic  pulserof 
RWE: 

To  U2o+ot  V2-aJf  if 
is  used. 

To  Uj  •  o+  or  Vj  •  <7+  if  * 
is  used. 


To  stop  periodic  pulserof 
RWE 

To  U2 - o_ or  V2- 0.  if  $y 
is  used. 

Toty-<7_or  Vt  -a_  if  <f> 
is  used. 


To  stort  pulser  of  RWE  (if  needed);  and 
to  either  start  next  CO  or  send  pulse  to/j 


Fig.  40.  Control  organ  CO 


Inputs  to  and  Outputs  from.  CU 


CC2  RWEC  CC3 


V\£.  11.  Read-write-erase  control  RWEC.  (a)  Control  organs  for  lengthen- 
ing C2  (COiandC02)  and  for  lengthening  the  lower  part  of  Ci  (CQ3  and  CO4). 


FIGURES 




Fig.  41.  Read-write-erase  control  RWEC.  (b)  PP(1)  to  store  the  fact  that 
a  "zero"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  ,  and  control  organs  for  writing  a  zero  and 
lengthening  the  upper  part  of  Ci  .  (This  figure  is  continued  from  p.  358.) 


Fig.  41.  Read-write-erase  control  RWEC.  (c)  PP(1)  to  store  the  fact  that  a 
"one"  is  to  be  written  in  xn  ,  and  control  organs  for  leaving  a  one  in  cell  xn  and 
lengthening  the  upper  part  of  Ci  .  (This  figure  is  continued  from  p.  359.) 


CC2  RWEC  CC3 


To  input 
a  of  CO,: 


Fig.  41.  Read-write-erase  control  RWEC.  (d)  Control  organs  for  shortening 
C2  •  (This  figure  is  continued  from  p.  360.) 


Fig.  41.  Read-write-erase  control  RWEC.  (e)  Control  organs  and  PP(1) 
for  shortening  the  lower  part  of  Ci  and  writing  in  cell  xn  .  (This  figure  is  con- 
tinued from  p.  361.) 


FIGURES 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


A 

B 

c 

H 

So 

f 

C 

So 

i 
? 

L 

•  t 

coi 

f 

'/// 

A 

T 

•  t 

coi 

C 

C 


c 

t 


t 

V/ 


t 

•t 

co. 

t 


c 

c 

So 

t 

i 

t 

So 

•  t 

co. 

♦ 

c 

•t 

co. 

°2 


(a)  Crossing  organ 
/  c 


H 

h  I 


c 


T 


Ton 

co. 

g  f 

Output  from  /'  and  / 
Output  from  e  and  f 


J 


101 010 
010  101 


(b)  Initial  state  of  clock 


Fig.  42.  Crossing  organ 


o  — 


0> 


■o 

o» 

O  O 

♦4— 

to 


</>  </> 

this 

O  <i> 
CO  t5 

JO  Jh 

v»— 

o 

o  x 

o  o 

v. 

*  = 

2  2 

£L 

3  0> 
QL  X 

C 

c  *" 

^  <r 

N 


X>  .  X) 


tVi  (VI 


2  2 


|2  £ 


T3 

0)  a> 

o  o 

a> 

</> 

_Q  XJ 

a>  a> 


o  o 

o  o 

SO 

CL 

tn  </> 

CVJ  Csl 

it  ste 

=° 

O  u 

o 

o  o 

♦4—  *♦— 

Vi 

<1> 

c 

O  U 
2  2 

o  b 
2  2 

Q. 

4) 

x: 

o  o 

^  o 

e 

V- 

|2 

O 

fa 


O 

CD 


o3 


E  * 


o 

2  a 

•4-  cn 


E     c  Q. 

0  H- 

Ll    in  O 


°  O 
01  CO 


p 

to 


CJ 



ii 


o 


£ 
o 
Ll 


—  3 


E  £ 


C7>  = 

o 

SE  £ 

E 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


D  E 


=> 

~o\ 

t 

o' 

(a)    Head  of  constructing  arm 


A     B    C     D  E 


s\ 

=> 

=> 

o\ 

— > 

-> 

t 

(b)    Head  fed  from  left 


D 

£ 

=> 

=> 

ft 

t 

ft 

t 

j 

ft 

t 

ft 

f 


(c)    Head  fed  from  below 

Fig.  44.  Constructing  arm 


(a) 

Starting  with 


(b) 

V<=  U 


(c) 

u  t  u 


*l 

into  s  or  s'  produces  'I  


5| 

into  o  or  o'  produces  I  


A 

=> 

u 

o\ 

t 

u 

A 

B 

=> 

=> 

-> 

<= 

<r 

A 

B 

=> 

=> 

^1 

-> 






0' 


Fig.  45.  Horizontal  advance  of  constructing  arm 


FIGURES 




(a) 

Starting  with 


(b) 

U   t        *  ft 


u  = 


into  o  or  o'  produces 


into  5  or  5'  produces 


A 

B 

U 

U 

=> 

t 

A 

\ 

ft 

t 

t 

0' 

A 

=> 

=> 

ft 

t 

t 

Fig.  46.  Vertical  advance  of  constructing  arm 


THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(a) 

Starting  with 


(b) 

U  ^  into  o   or  o'  produces 


U  < 


u  t 


into  5    or  s'  produces 


(d) 

U ~>  U  {  U  S    into  o    or  o'  produces 


(e) 
u  = 


U  7       into  5   or  s'  produces 


s'o\ 

=> 

~o\ 

-> 

f 

^1 

0' 

-> 

Ol 

t 



5/ 1 



Fig.  47.  Horizontal  retreat  of  constructing  arm  with  construction  of  y  and  5 


FIGURES 




(a) 

Starting  with 


(b) 

u  *■  u  ^  u 


into  o  or  o'  produces 


-I 


ft 

^1 

t 

0' 

I 

t 

~o\ 

t 

(c) 


U  ^  U  <=  U  y     into  s  or  s'  prod 


uces 


r 


o> 


(d) 

U   t  S 


into  o  or  o'  produces 



s 

-1 

=> 

t 

^1 

t 

(e) 
u  - 


into  5  or  s'  produces 


r 

s 

=> 

t 

Fig.  48.  Vertical  retreat  of  constructing  arm  with  construction  of  y  and  8 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(a) 

Starting  with 


s'o\ 


(b) 
U  f 


into  o  or  o'  produces 


s\ 


t 

O' 


e 


A  pulse  into  o  or  o1  exits  at  e 
as  the  stimulus  to  start  the 
secondary  automaton 


t 

*5i 

f 

U    =t>       into  5  or  5'  produces 


^1 

t 

0' 


Fig.  49.  Injection  of  starting  stimulus  into  the  secondary  automaton 


.2  E 
o 




n 


° 

s  1 

CL  C 
O 

•  °» 
I  5 


O 



O 


o 



ft 
G 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


(a)      Start  with 


A 

B 

c 

D 

E 

v\ 

c 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

u\ 

c 

=> 

=> 

=> 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

VN 




n-1 

n 

n+1 

w\ 

<- 

<- 



L  3 



in  which  the  reading   loop  passes  through  cell  Xn  . 


(b)      The  sequence    10101    into  V  produces: 

(1)  lot  W  if  Xn  is  U  (representing  "zero") 

(2)  1 0 1 0 1  at  W  if  Xn  is  ♦  ( representing  "one") 

(3)  and  leaves   cell   Xn    in  state  i: 

A    B  C     D  E 


V\ 

u\ 

w 


c 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

c 

=> 

=> 

=> 

=> 

A' 

i 

A- 

A- 
/?  -l 

<- 

<r 

<- 

<- 

<- 

<- 

J 



Fig.  51.  New  method  of  operating  the  linear  array  L 


(a)     Starting  with 


"1 

c 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

c 

=> 

=£> 

X 

X 

X 

X 




n-1 

w\ 

<- 

<- 

<- 

(b)     U   ^  U  |f  U 

V 

u\ 


into  produces: 


W 


(c)    U  I  U  *  u  <-       into  ^  produces: 


1/ 


U 


w 


c 

->> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 


c 

=£► 

=> 

=> 

X 

ft 

A- 

<- 

<- 

<- 

=> 

c 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 


c 

=> 

=> 


y 

A' 

X 
n-1 

<- 

<- 

«=- 

<r 

<- 

<- 

:  U  -»      into  £/  produces: 

1  c 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 

<= 

1  c 

=> 

=> 

=> 

=> 

it 

$ 

X 
n-i 

X 
n+i 

1  - 

<- 

<- 

(e)    U  i  U  i 

V\ 
U\ 

w 


into  /  produces: 


c 

-> 

-> 

-> 

-> 


c 

=> 

=> 

=> 

/?-/ 

A' 
/7 

A' 

/7+i 

<- 

<- 

<- 

<- 

<- 

<- 

Fig.  52.  Writing  "one"  in  cell  xn  and  lengthening  the  reading  loop 


SYMBOL  INDEX 


Note:  page  references  are  to  the  text  locations  where  symbols  are  denned  01 
formally  introduced  for  the  first  time. 

A  (a,  £)  (CU  transition  function),  206 
C€tf  (confluent  state),  148 
Ci  (connecting  loop),  208 
C2  (timing  loop),  213 

CCi ,  CC2 ,  CC3  (coded  channel  of  MC),  227 

CO  (control  organ),  244 

CU  (constructing  unit) ,  205 

D  (delay  area  of  CO),  245 

D^'1  •  •  •  in)  (decoding  organ),  176 

3D(M),  SD'(M)  (description  of  a  Turing  machine)  270-271 
E{a)  (CU  output  function),  206 
FA  (finite  automaton),  267 

(cell  vector),  133 
ii ,  ii ,  H  (inputs  to  CU,  outputs  of  MC),  232 
i1  •  •  ■  in  (rigidly  timed  sequence),  157 
%i  . . .  {n  (periodic  repetition),  158 
L  (linear  array),  202 
Mc  (universal  constructor),  271 
Mc*  (modified  universal  constructor),  295 
Mu  (universal  computing  machine),  270 
MC  (memory  control),  205 

(state  of  cell  #  at  time  t),  133 
ns  (subsequent  location  to  read  value  of  £n),  204 
01,02,03,  04 ,  o5  (outputs  of  CU,  inputs  to  MC),  232-233 
Pffl  ■  •  •  in)  (pulser),  159 
PP^1  -  ■  •  in)  (periodic  pulser),  163 
R^1  •  •  •  in)  (recognizer),  189 
RWE  (read-write-erase  unit),  226 
RWEC  (read-write-erase  control  unit),  226 
Ss  (set  of  direct-process  states),  145 
SO«  (state  organ),  267 
Tuae  (transmission  state),  148 
U  (unexcitable  state),  140 
W  (delay  area  of  MC),  227 
Wi ,  W2 ,  W3 ,  W4  (sub-areas  of  W),  256 
X  (area  X  of  MC),  227 

Xi  f  yi  (secondary  automaton  coordinates) .  116 

xn  (cell  of  L  under  scan),  203 

X(a)  (CU  output  function),  206 

Y  (transfer  area  of  MC),  227 

Z  (area  Z  of  MC),  227 

Zi ,  Z2 ,  Z3 ,  Z4  (sub-areas  of  Z),  256 






SYMBOL  INDEX 


a  (length  of  secondary  automaton),  116 

/3  (width  of  secondary  automaton),  116 

es  (lengthen-shorten  parameter  for  G  ,  C2),  204 

\ij  (state  of  cell  117 

£ns  (value  of  the  nth  cell  of  L),  204 

<£  (triple-return  counter),  181 

•  (1  vs.  10101  discriminator),  187 
ft  (responding  organ  of  $),  181 

[0]  (ordinary  stimuli),  148 
[1]  (special  stimuli),  148 

Z,  to,      10  (ordinary  transmission  states),  152 
J>,  ti,  <L,  |i  (special  transmission  states),  152 

•  ("and"),  100 
-  ("not"),  100 
+  ("or"),  100 

^ ,  *  ,  J,  (ordinary  transmission  states),  262 
ft  j  ^>  U  (special  transmission  states),  262 

•  t  ,  •  ft ,  etc.  (ordinary  or  special  transmission  states  initially  active),  262 


AUTHOR. SUBJECT  INDEX 


Acoustic  delay  line.  See  Storage  de- 
vices 

Analog  computers,  21,  22,  35-36,  68- 
70,  98 

Area  X,  227,  252-253,  293 
Area  Z,  227  ,  253,  293 

construction  of,  256-257 
Automata 

artificial,  21-25.  See  also  Com- 
puters 

complex,  20,  32,  79 

complexity  of,  36-37 

complicated,  20 

constructed.  See  Secondary  (con- 
structed) automaton 

constructing.  See  Primary  (con- 
structing) automaton 

construction  aspects  of,  92  et  pas- 
sim 

efficiency  of,  37-39,  91-92 
formalistic  study  of,  91,  102 
human  nervous  system  and,  9-10, 
43-49 

logical  aspects  of,  92  et  passim 
natural,  21-25,  64 
non-constructible,  291 
probabilistic,  99 

self-reproducing,  19,  21,  294-296. 

See  also  Self-reproduction 
single-cell,  111 

see  also  Computers;  Finite  au- 
tomata; Infinite  cellular  au- 
tomata 
Automata  theory,  10,  17-28 

biology  and,  21 

communication  and  control  en- 
gineering and,  21 

continuous  mathematics  and,  25- 
27,  97 

mathematical  logic  and,  10,  19, 
25,  43-45,  47-48,  49-56 

thermodynamics  and,  28 
Automatic  programming,  5,  14-15 
Automaton  milieu,  72-73 
Axiomatic  method,  43-44,  76 


Balance,  28,  40-41,  63 
Base  two,  114 
Behavior,  270 
Bigelow,  J.,  12,  105 
Birkhoff,  G.,  2,  34,  59 
Bitwise  implication,  175 
Black  box,  45 

Boltzmann,  L.,  26,  59,  60-61 
Boltzmann's  constant,  66 
Boolean  algebra,  100 
Booth,  A.  D.,  16 
Brainerd,  J.  G.,  6 
Brillouin,  L.,  68 

Burks,  A.  W.,  6,  12,  37,  43,  126,  262, 
270,  271,  291 

Calculation  chain,  24 

Cellular  automata.  See  Cellular 
structure;  Infinite  cellular  au- 
tomata 

Cellular  model,  description  of,  106- 

Cellular  structure,  94,  103-106,  288 
construction-universality   of,  92, 

logical  universality  of,  265-271 

tape-reading  method  in,  283 

tape  unit  in,  26,  293 

von  Neumann's  29-state,  291-292 
Church,  A.,  261-262 
Codd,  E.  F.,  280 

Coded  channel,  180,  190-200,  227, 
228,  239-243,  252,  293 
behavior  described,  190-191,  227 
capacity  of  in  MC,  239-241 
construction  of,  192-194 
corruption  problems  in,  191,  196- 

cyclicity  in,  198-200 
dimensions  of,  195,  242-243 
function  of,  190,  191-192 
main  channel  of,  193 
rule  for  avoiding  corruption  in,  198 
timing  considerations  for,  195-196 
Coincidence  organ,  81 






THEORY    OF   SELF-  REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Collision    in    single  reproduction, 

avoidance  of,  120-121 
Combinatorics,  62 
Communication  channel,  60 
Complexity,  22,  23,  54,  58,  65-73, 
79-80,  118 

reliability  and,  23 
Complication,  47-48,  64-73,  78-  86 

complexity  and,  79-80 

degeneration  and,  79-80 
Component  size,  20 
Computation,  24,  270 

quantity  of,  26 

size  and  reliability  related,  26 

speed  of,  37-41 
Computer    components    and  effi- 
ciency, 22,  66-67,  72-73 
Computers,  32,  35-41,  75 

applications  of  in  science,  33-34 

circuits  of,  15-17 

efficiency  of,  28 

heuristic  use  of,  3-5,  33-35 

human  nervous  system  and,  9-10, 
43-49 

mixed  synchronous,  asynchronous, 

see  also  Analog  computers;  Auto- 
mata; Digital  computers 
Confluent  states  Cfe',  107,  136-139, 

and  the  -f  neuron,  136 

and  the  •  neuron,  136-137,  138 
Connecting  loop  G ,  115,  180,  208, 
210-213,  228,  238,  246,  293 

lengthening  of,  216,  218-220 

preliminary    description    of  be- 
havior of,  210-213 

shortening  of,  222-224 
Connecting  organ,  80 
Constructibility,  92,  156,  292 
Constructing  arm,  271-276 

design  of,  272-276 

double  path  procedure,  273-277 

head  of,  274 

operation  of,  274-275 

single  path  procedure,  272-273,  277 
Constructing  unit  CU,  205-208,  238, 

design  of,  279-280,  295 
function  of,  201-202 


input-output  connections,  232-233 
interconnections  with  MC,  205- 

206,  228-229,  232-233 
postulates  for,  207 
schematic  description  of,  206-207 
viewed  as  special  type  of  finite 

automaton,  286 
Construction,  101-132,  288  et  passim 
geometry  and  kinematics  of,  101- 


Construction-universality,  92,  1 1 6 

of  cellular  structure,  286,  292 
Constructive  method,  91-92 
Control  organ  CO,  227-228,  229,  230, 

delay  adjustments  in,  244-245 
operation  of,  230 
see  also  Memory  control  unit 
Conversion  of  freely  timed  sequences 
to  rigidly  timed  ones.  See  Static- 
dynamic  converter 
" Copying,"  use  of  descriptions  vs. 
originals  in  self-reproduction,  84, 
121-122 

Crossing  lines  and  paths.  See  Wire- 
crossing 
Crossing  organ,  262-263 

clock  sequences  in,  262 

used  to  solve  interference  problem 
for  MC,  263-264 
Crystal,  103 
Crystal  lattice,  104 
Crystalline  regularity,  93,  94 
Crystalline  structure,  132 
Crystalline  symmetry,  103-104 
Cutting  organ,  81 

Decision  machine,  52 

Decoding  organ  D^'1  •  •  •  in),  175-179 

behavior  described,  175 

characteristic  of,  176 

construction  of,  175-179 

dimensions  of,  176-177,  178 

order  of,  176 

timing  considerations  for,  176,  177, 
178-179. 
Degenerative  processes,  62 
Delay  area  D,  246 

dimensions  of,  256 
Delay  area  W,  227,  241-242,  243 


A.UTHOR  SUBJECT  INDEX 


construction  of,  256-257 
delay  considerations  and,  257-258, 

Delay  line.  See  Storage  devices 

Delay  paths,  146 
odd, 146-147 

Delays,  single,  147 

through  confluent  states,  147 

Descriptive  statement  L,  for  nu- 
merical parameters,  112-113 

Differential  equations  of  self-repro- 
duction, 97,  106 

Diffusion  processes,  97-98 

Digital  computers,  21,  22,  35,  36,  69- 
70,  98 

Digital  notation,  48 

Digital  organ,  69-70 

Digitalization,  61-62 

Dimensionality,  104-105 

Direct  process,  107,  111,  142-145, 

need  for  control  by  fixed  stimulus 
sequences,  143-145 
Directed  process,  135 
Double  line  trick,  138 

Eccles,  J.  C,  97 
Eckert,  J.  P.,  6,  8 
EDSAC,  9 

EDVAC,  9-11,  19,  158,  261 

Efficiency,  28,  40,  48,  67,  93.  See  also 
Computer  components  and  effi- 
ciency 

Elementary  parts,  77 

Energy  and  information,  66-67 

ENIAC,  6-10,  19,  37,  48,  65 

Entropy,  59-63,  67 

Entscheidnngsproblem,  49,  204.  See 
also  Halting  problem 

Error-detecting  and  -correcting  codes, 

Error  detection  and  correction,  24- 

25,  73 
Estrin,  G.,  12 

Evolution,  79,  92-93,  99,  131 
Excitation,  44,  97-98 


Failure,  58,  70-73 
Fatigue,  44,  96,  97-98 


Finite  automata,  108,  114-115,  267, 

embedded  in  cellular  structure, 
267-268,  293 
Flip-flop,  174 
Flow  diagram,  13-14,  84 
Free  timing,  157 
Fusing  organ,  81 

"Garden-of-Eden"  configuration,  291 

Gene-function,  130 

Godel,  K.,  25,  53,  55-56,  125,  126 

Godel  number,  55 

Godel's  theorems,  47,  51,  53-56 

Godel's   undecidable   formula  and 

self-reproducing  automata,  126 
Goldstine,  H.  H.,  4,  6,  12,  37,  95, 

105,  279 
Gorman,  J.  E.,  262 
Goto,  E.,  16,  17 
Growth,  109,  110 
Growth  functions,  139-142 

Halting  problem,  52-53,  124-126 
undecidability  of  and  Richard's 
paradox,  125-126 
see  also  Entscheidungsproblem 
Hamming,  R.  W.,  61 
Hartley,  R.  V.  L.,  59,  61 
Heuristic  use  of  computers,  3-5,  33, 

Hixon  Symposium,  53,  81 
Holland,  J.  H.,  99,  262,  270 
Homogeneity,  72,  103-106 

functional  or  intrinsic,  103-104, 
106,  288 

total,  104 
Homogeneous  medium,  103 
Hydrodynamics,  2-3,  34 

computers  and,  3 

Idealized  computing  elements  and 

computer  design,  9-10 
Idealized    excitation  -  threshold  -  fa- 
tigue neuron,  96 
Idealized  neurons,  44  ff.,  287 
Idealized  switch-delay  elements,  25 
Infinite  cellular  automata,  108  et  pas- 
sim 




THEORY   OF   SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


spatial   and   temporal  relations, 
132-134,  152 
Information,  18,  26,  57,  59-63,  66, 
67,78 

Information  theory,  19,  27,  42,  60-63 

et  passim 
Inhibitory  organ,  81 
Initial  cell  assignment,  108,  152,  291 
Initially  quiescent  automata,  264, 


Input  direction,  135 
Isotrophy,  105,  106,  288 

JONIAC,  12 

Kemeny,  J.,  95-96 
Keynes,  J.  M.,  59 
Kinematics,  101 

Kleene,  S.  C,  43,  101,  123,  125 

Language,  complete  epistemological 

description  of,  55 
Laplace,  P.  S.,  58 
Lee,  C.  Y.,  290 

Linear  array  L,  112-116,  202-204, 
259,  293 

altering  xn  in,  210-212,  224-226 
described,  203 
function  of,  203 

function  of  Q  and  C2  in  lengthen- 
ing and  shortening  on,  214-216 

lengthening  on,  216-220 

moving  its  connection  with  MC, 
214-226 

operations  on  summarized,  209- 

read-write  sequence  of  operations 

on,  209-210 
shortening  on,  220-224 
use  of  for  non-numerical  (univer- 
sal) parametrization,  116 
Logic,  formal,  42-43 
Logical  depth,  24 
Logical  operators,  42,  99-101,  111 
Logical  organization,  20,  22,  23-24 
Logical  universality,  92,  265-271, 
287,  292 

McCulloch,  W.,  9,  43  ff.,  77,  100,  101 
McCulloch-Pitts  neuron  nets,  43-49, 
75,  80 


Machine  language,  14-15 
Machine-man  interaction,  5 
McNaughton,  R.,  270 
Main  channel  of  coded  channel,  193 
MASER,  16 

Mathematical  logic,  10, 19,  25,  43-45, 

47-56 
Mauchly,  J.,  6 
Maxwell's  demon,  60,  61 
Memory,  39-41,  67-68,  101,  203 

access  to,  40-41 

capacity  of,  40-41,  68 

hierarchical,  23-24,  41 

human,  39,  48-49 

unlimited,  113-114 

virtual,  68 

see  also  Storage  devices 
Memory  control  unit  MC,  115,  201- 
202,  205-206,  226-250,  251-252, 
293,  et  passim  Ch.  4 
constructing  devices  in,  264-265 
control  organ  CO  in,  243-246 
corruption  considerations,  253-255 
delays  in  control  processes  in,  254- 

design  modifications  of,  257,  264- 

dimensions  of,  244 
dimensions  of  areas  X,  Y,  Z,  W, 

function  of,  205-206,  231-238 

interconnections  with  CU,  205- 
206,  228-229,  232-233 

modus  operandi  on  L,  207-210 

1010  as  no-response  characteris- 
tic, 209 

operation  of,  228-229 

organization  of,  226-228 

postulates  for,  207 

redesign  using  double  path  pro- 
cedure for  reading  L,  277-279 

solution  of  interference  problem  in, 
259-264 

Mixed  analog-digital  systems,  22,  27 

Monte  Carlo  method,  6 

Moore,  E.  F.,  94,  291 

Morgenstern,  O.,  2,  59 

Morphogenesis,  99 

Motor  organ,  80 

Muntyan,  M.,  279 

Muscle  organ,  77,  80,  81-82 


AUTHOR-SUBJECT  INDEX 




Mutation,  87,  130 
Myhill,  J.,  291 

Natural  selection,  131 
Negation,  synthesis  of,  138 
Neighbors,  immediate,  133 
Nervous  system,  9-10,  39,  42-48,  64 

complexity  of,  37 

languages  of,  15 

probablistic  logics  and,  15 
Neuron  fatigue,  48-49 
Neuron  response,  100 
Neuron  stimulus,  100 
Neurons,  77,  99-101 

excited,  44 

quiescent,  44 
Non-Euclidean  spaces,  103 
Non-linear  partial  differential  equa- 
tions, 2,  19,  33-34,  97 

of  self -reproduction,  97,  106 
Nyquist,  H.,  61 


1  vs.  10101  discriminator^,  187-189, 
209,  292 
behavior  described,  187 
construction  of,  188-189 
dimensions  of,  188-189 
function  of,  187 

timing  considerations  for,  188-189 

Optimality  and  minimality,  91-92 

Ordinary  stimulus,  110-111 

Ordinary  transmission  states  Toae  > 
107,  134-136 
as  connecting  lines,  135-136 
logical-neural  functions  and,  134 

Output  direction,  135 

Parallel  processing,  7,  22,  23,  157- 
158,  261 

Parametron,  16   

Periodic  pulser  PPft1  •  •  •  in),  162- 
175,  238,  292 
alternate  periodic  pulser  PP(1),  174 
characteristic  of,  163 
construction  of,  163-175 
corruption  of  by  interference,  169- 

dimensions  of,  163-164,  170-171 
external     characteristics  sum- 
marized, 174-175 


operation  illustrated,  162-163 

order  of,  163 

phasing  for,  173-174 

rules  for  avoiding  corruption  (final 
version),  172 

rules  for  avoiding  corruption  (ini- 
tial version),  169-170 

special  periodic  pulser  PP(1),  163, 
167,  227 

special  periodic  pulser  PP(1), 
shown  defective  and  altered, 

start  mechanism  of,  164 
stop  mechanism  of,  165-166 
timing   considerations  corrected, 
172-173 

timing  considerations  for,  168-169, 
170-171 
Periodic  repetition,  158 
Pitts,  W.,  9,  43  ff.,  77,  100,  101 
Primary  (constructing)  automaton, 

82,  111,  116,  271,  288,  289 
Probabilistic  logics,  20,  26,  58-63,  99 
Probability  theory,  99 
Programmer's  language,  14-15 
Programming,  12-15 
Propositional  functions,  100-101 
Pulser  P(i*  •  •  •       159-162,  292 

behavior  described,  159 

characteristic  of,  159 

construction  of,  159-161 

dimensions  of,  159-161 

external  characteristics  sum- 
marized, 162 

order  of,  159 

timing  for,  160-161 

Quadratic  lattice,  132 
Quantum  mechanics,  59,  62 
Quiescence,  total,  104 
Quiescent  states,  99,  103,  106-107 

Rajchman,  J.  A.,  12 
Read- write  mechanisms,  114-116 
Read-write-erase  control  unit  RWEC, 
226,  227,  246-250,  251,  259,  293 

control  organs  CO  of,  229-230 

dimensions  of,  242-243 

function  of,  246-247 
Read-write-erase  unit  RWE,  226- 




THEORY  OF  SELF-UEPltODUCING  AUTOMATA 


227,  230-231,  237-243,  251,  259, 

construction  of,  237-243 

dimensions  of,  241 
Recognizer  R(iH2  •  •  •  in),  189-190 
Recognizing  device,   175.  See  also 

Recognizer 
Recursive  functions,  25 
Redundancy,  60 

Refractoriness,  96.  See  also  Fatigue 
Refractory  period,  48,  96 
Regularity,  105 

Reliability,  22,  23,  24-25,  67,  70-73 
Reliable    systems,    and  unreliable 

components,  19,  70-71 
Responding  organ  Q,  181,  215 
Reverse  process,  107,  111,  140-142, 

need  for,  143 
Richard,  J.,  123 
Richard  paradox,  123-124 

and  self -reproduction,  122-123 
Rigid  binary  tape,  83 
Rigid  member,  81 
Rigid  timing,  157 
Russell,  B.,  125 

Scientific  method,  3 
Secondary  (constructed)  automaton, 
111,  271,  288 
algorithm   for   constructing  and 

starting,  276 
algorithm   for   constructing  and 

starting  revised,  283-285 
complete  description  of  initial  con- 
ditions for,  117 
construction  of,  272,  280-285,  290  - 

dimensions  of,  116-117 
initial  state  of,  117,  127-128 
parametric  form  plan  of,  112-113 
plan  of,  111-112 
positioning  of,  126-127,  129 
starting  stimulus  for,  128 
universal  type  of  plan  of,  116-118 
Self-reference  and  self-reproduction, 
125-126 

Self-reproducing  cellular  automaton, 
294-296 

Self -reproduction,  19-21,  78-86,  92, 
95,  106,  289-291,  292 


a  priori  argument  against,  79,  118, 

cellular  model  of,  93-95 

circumvention  of  a  priori  argu- 
ment against,  118-119 

conflicts  and  collisions  of  progeny, 

continuous  model  of,  93,  95,  97-99, 

105-106,  288 
differentia]  equations  of,  97,  106 
cxcitation-threshold-fatigue  model 

of,  93,  95,  96 
in  a  cellular  structure,  294-296 
kinematic  model  of,  80-87,  93-94, 

287-288 

physiological  aspects  of  for  auto- 
mata, 129-131 

probabilistic  model  of,  93 

sequential,  128-129 

single-action,  128-129 
Sequencing,  111-112 
Serial  processing,  22,  23 
Shannon,  C.  E.,  27,  59-61 
Sharpless,  T.  K.,  6 
Simulation,  14-15 
Size,  64-65 

Special  stimuli,  110-111,  288 

origination  of,  141-142 
Special  transmission  states  Tiae ,  107 
Speed,  65-66 
Split,  139 
SSEC,  65 

State  organ  SO,  267-269 
State  transition  rule 

derived  for  confluent  states,  136- 

derived  for  ordinary  transmission 

states,  135-136 
derived  for  sensitized  states,  144- 


derived  for  special  transmission 

states,  140 
illustrated,  151-156 
modifications  required  by  reverse 

process,  140-141 
modified  for  confluent  states,  147- 


rigorous  description  of,  148-150 
verbal  summary,  150-151 

States 

active,  103 


AUTHOR-SUBJECT  INDEX 


UH7 


duality  of  ordinary  and  special, 

142-143 
excitable,  107,  109,  288 
excited,  99 
initial,  108,  264 

of  cellular  automaton,  verbal  sum- 
mary, 150-151 

sensitized,  107,  145 

see  also  Confluent  states;  Ordinary 
transmission  states;  Special 
transmission  states;  Unexcita- 
ble  state 

Static-dynamic  converter,  281-283 

Stationarity,  103 

Stimuli  producer,  81 

Stimulus  organ,  81 

Stop  at  step  /,  158 

Stop  in  period  s,  158 

Stop  in  phase  k  in  period  s,  158 

Storage  devices,  7,  10,  41 

acoustic  delay  line,  8,  67-68 

cathode  ray  tube,  68 

electrostatic,  11-12 

film,  75 

magnetic  tape,  75 

punched  cards,  75 

punched  tape,  74 

vacuum  tubes,  7-8,  67 

see  also  Memory 
Strict  logics,  59 
Structure,  104-106 
"Structure  of  the  vacuum,"  102-106, 

Subharmonic  generator,  16-17 
Survival,  72,  73 
Synthesis,  75-86 
Szilard,  L.,  59,  60,  61 

Tape  and  tape  control  components, 

Tape-copying  operation,  295 

Tape,   indefinitely   extendible,  92, 

202-203,  289 
Tarski,  A.,  55 
Taub,  A.,  1 

Temporal  reference  frame,  108 
Tessellation    model.    See  Cellular 

structure 
Thatcher,  J.,  279,  280,  290,  291 
Theory  of  games,  21 


Thermodynamic-based  logics,  62-63 
Thermodynamics,  19,  26,  28,  59-63, 

66,  91 
Threshold,  97-98 
Threshold  neurons,  96 
Threshold  switches,  9 
Timing  loop  C2 ,  115,  180,  213-214, 
228,  238,  246,  293 

function  of,  213,  215 

lengthening  of,  216-218 

shortening  of,  221-222 

timing  considerations  for,  213-214 
Tissues,  77 

Total  numerical  material  produced 

in  a  process,  39 
Transfer  area  Y,  227,  252-253,  293 
Transition  rule,  132,  134 
Transmission  states  Twae ,  135.  See 
also  Ordinary  transmission  states; 
Special  transmission  states 
Triple-return   counter  <£,  179-187, 
215,  227,  238,  292 
behavior  described,  180 
coding  and  decoding  considera- 
tions for,  184-185 
construction  of,  181-185 
corruption  considerations  for,  186 
dimensions  of,  179,  185-186 
function  of,  180 
function  of  in  MC,  234 
primary  and  secondary  input-out- 
put pairs  in,  181 
timing   considerations   for,  181, 
185-187 

Turing,  A.,  14,  25,  43,49fT.,  52,  83, 

92,  99,  122,  204 
Turing  machine,  25,  45,  49-53,  54, 

74-75,  107,  114-115,  289,  293 
abstract,  52 

automatic  programming  and,  14- 

circle-free,  52,  124 

circular,  52,  124 

concrete,  51-52,  124 

see  also  Universal  Turing  machine 
29-state  finite  automaton  cell,  94, 

106-108 
Type  theory,  51,  53-55,  125 

Ulam,  S.  M.,  1,  2,  3,  5,  6,  28,  94,  95, 




THEORY  OF  SELF-REPRODUCING  AUTOMATA 


Unexcitable  state  U,  107,  109,  139- 
140,  288 

Universal  computing  machine  Mu  , 

270-271,  285-286,  294 
Universal  construction,  affected  by 

interference   problem   for  MC, 

260-261 

Universal  constructor  M c  =  CU  + 
(MC  +  L),  271-286,  289-291,  294 
general  construction  procedure,  272 
modified  to  Mc*,  295 
see  also  Constructing  arm;  Con- 
structing unit 
Universal  Turing  machine,  50-51, 
52,  56,  83,  288 
designed  in  cellular  structure,  266- 


operation  of  in  cellular  space,  268- 

Vanuxem  Lectures,  95-96 
Visual  pattern,  46-47,  53-54 
Volume,  66 

von  Neumann,  Mrs.  K.,  1,  94 
von  Neumann's  five  main  questions, 
92,  292 

Wang,  H.,  291 

Wiener,  N.,  22,  27,  60,  91 

Wigington,  R.  L.,  16 

Wilkes,  M.  V.,  9 

Williams,  F.  C,  12 

Wire-crossing,  180,  183,  190,  191- 

192,  261-264 
Wright,  J.,  43 


LIBRARY  U.  OF  I.,  UR8ANA-CHAMPAIGN 


/ 


