Computers and Automata
by Claude E. Shannon

Proceedings of the I.R.E., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1234-1241, October 1953
DOI: 10.1109/JRPROC.1953.274273

Source: Extracted from Fermat's Library (fermatslibrary.com/s/computers-and-automata)
Note: OCR text from PDF; minor artifacts may be present.
================================================================================

Computers and Automata*

CLAUDE E. SHANNON, FELLOW, IRE

Summary -- This paper reviews briefly some of the recent developments in the
field of automata and nonnumerical computation. A number of typical machines
are described, including logic machines, game-playing machines and learning
machines. Some theoretical questions and developments are discussed, such as
a comparison of computers and the brain, Turing's formulation of computing
machines and von Neumann's models of self-reproducing machines.

* Decimal classification: 621.385.2. Original manuscript received by the
Institute, July 17, 1953.
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J.


INTRODUCTION

Samuel Butler, in 1871, completed the manuscript of a most engaging social
satire, Erewhon. Three chapters of Erewhon, originally appearing under the
title "Darwin Among the Machines," are a witty parody of The Origin of
Species. In the topsy-turvy logic of satirical writing, Butler sees machines
as gradually evolving into higher forms. He considers the classification of
machines into genera, species and varieties, their feeding habits, their
rudimentary sense organs, their reproductive and evolutionary mechanisms
(inefficient machines force men to design more efficient ones), tendencies
toward reversion, vestigial organs, and even the problem of free will in
machines.

Rereading Erewhon today one finds "The Book of the Machines" disturbingly
prophetic. Current and projected computers and control systems are indeed
assuming more and more the capacities and functions of animals and man, to a
far greater degree, in fact, than was envisaged by Butler.

The bread-and-butter work of large-scale computers has been the solution of
involved numerical problems. To many of us, however, the most exciting
potentialities of computers lie in their ability to perform non-numerical
operations -- to work with logic, translate languages, design circuits, play
games, co-ordinate sensory and manipulative devices and, generally, assume
complicated functions associated with the human brain.

Non-numerical computation is by no means an unproven offspring of the more
publicized arithmetic calculation. The shoe is rather on the other foot. A
hundred years ago Charles Babbage was inspired in the design of his remarkably
prescient analytical engine by a portrait woven in silk on a card controlled
Jacquard loom -- a device then in existence half a century. The largest and
most reliable current information processing machine is still the automatic
telephone system. Our factories are filled with ingenious and unsung devices
performing almost incredible feats of sensing, processing and transporting
materials in all shapes and forms. Railway and power systems have elaborate
control and protective networks against accidents and human errors.

These, however, are all special-purpose automata. A significant new concept
in non-numerical computation is the idea of a general-purpose programmed
computer -- a device capable of carrying out a long sequence of elementary
orders analogous to those of a numerical computer. The elementary orders,
however, will relate not to operations on numbers but to physical motions,
operations with words, equations, incoming sensory data, or almost any
physical or conceptual entities.

This paper reviews briefly some of the research in non-numerical computation
and discusses certain of the problems involved. The field is currently very
active and in a short paper only a few sample developments can be mentioned.


THE BRAIN AND COMPUTERS

The brain has often been compared, perhaps over-enthusiastically, with
computing machines. It contains roughly 10^10 active elements called neurons.
Because of the all or none law of nervous action, neurons bear some functional
resemblance to our binary computer elements, relays, vacuum tubes or
transistors. The number of elements is six orders of magnitude greater than
our largest computers. McCullough has picturesquely put it that a computer
with as many tubes as a man has neurons would require the Empire State
building to house it, Niagara Falls to power it and the Niagara river to cool
it. The use of transistors in such a comparison would improve the figures
considerably, power requirements coming down to the hundreds of kilowatt
range (the brain dissipates some 25 watts) and size requirements (with close
packing) comparable to an ordinary dwelling. It may also be argued that the
increased speed of electronic components by a factor of, say, 10^5 might be
partially exchangeable against equipment requirements.

Comparisons of this sort should be taken well salted -- our understanding of
brain functioning is still, in spite of a great deal of important and
illuminating research, very primitive. Whether, for example, the neuron
itself is the proper level for a functional analysis is still an open
question. The random structure at the neural level in number, placement and
interconnections of the neurons, suggests that only the statistics are
important at this stage, and, consequently, that one might average over local
structure and functioning before constructing a mathematical model.

The similarities between the brain and computers have often been pointed out.
The differences are perhaps more illuminating, for they may suggest the
important features missing from our best current brain models. Among the most
important of these are:

1. Differences in size. Six orders of magnitude in the number of components
   takes us so far from our ordinary experience as to make extrapolation of
   function next to meaningless.

2. Differences in structural organization. The apparently random local
   structure of nerve networks is vastly different from the precise wiring of
   artificial automata, where a single wrong connection may cause
   malfunctioning. The brain somehow is designed so that overall functioning
   does not depend on the exact structure in the small.

3. Differences in reliability organization. The brain can operate reliably
   for decades without really serious malfunctioning (comparable to the
   meaningless gibberish produced by a computer in trouble conditions) even
   though the components are probably individually no more reliable than those
   used in computers.

4. Differences in logical organization. The differences here seem so great as
   to defy enumeration. The brain is largely self-organizing. It can adapt to
   an enormous variety of situations tolerably well. It has remarkable memory
   classification and access features, the ability to rapidly locate stored
   data via numerous "coordinate systems." It can set up stable servo systems
   involving complex relations between its sensory inputs and motor outputs,
   with great facility. In contrast, our digital computers look like idiot
   savants. For long chains of arithmetic operations a digital computer runs
   circles around the best humans. When we try to program computers for other
   activities their entire organization seems clumsy and inappropriate.

5. Differences in input-output equipment. The brain is equipped with
   beautifully designed input organs, particularly the ear and the eye, for
   sensing the state of its environment. Our best artificial counterparts,
   such as Shepard's Analyzing Reader for recognizing and transcribing type,
   and the "Audrey" speech recognition system which can recognize the speech
   sounds for the ten digits seem pathetic by comparison. On the output end,
   the brain controls hundreds of muscles and glands. The two arms and hands
   have some sixty independent degrees of freedom. Compare this with the
   manipulative ability of the digitally controlled milling machine developed
   at M.I.T., which can move its work in but three co-ordinates. Most of our
   computers, indeed, have no significant sensory or manipulative contact
   with the real world but operate only in an abstract environment of numbers
   and operations on numbers.


TURING MACHINES

The basic mathematical theory of digital computers was developed by A. M.
Turing in 1936 in a classic paper "On Computable Numbers with an Application
to the Entscheidungsproblem." He defined a class of computing machines, now
called Turing machines, consisting basically of an infinite paper tape and a
computing element. The computing element has a finite number of internal
states and is capable of reading from and writing on one cell of the tape and
of moving it one cell to the right or left. At a given time, the computing
element will be in a certain state and reading what is written in a particular
cell of the tape. The next operation will be determined by the current state
and the symbol being read. This operation will consist of assuming a new state
and either writing a new symbol (in place of the one currently read) or moving
to the right or to the left.

It is possible for machines of this type to compute numbers by setting up a
suitable code for interpreting the symbols. For example, in Turing's
formulation the machines print final answers in binary notation on alternate
cells of the tape, using the other cells for intermediate calculations.

It can be shown that such machines form an extremely broad class of computers.
All ordinary digital computers which do not contain a random or probabilistic
element are equivalent to some Turing machine. Any number that can be computed
on these machines, or in fact by any ordinary computing process, can be
computed by a suitable Turing machine. There are, however, as Turing showed,
certain problems that cannot be solved and certain numbers that cannot be
computed by any Turing machine. For example, it is not possible to construct a
Turing machine which, given a suitably coded description of another Turing
machine, can always tell whether or not the second Turing machine will
continue indefinitely to print symbols in the squares corresponding to the
final answer. It may, at a certain point in the calculation, relapse into an
infinite intermediate computation. The existence of mechanically unsolvable
problems of this sort is of great interest to logicians.

Turing also developed the interesting concept of a universal Turing machine.
This is a machine with the property that if a suitably coded description of
any Turing machine is printed on its tape, and the machine started at a
suitable point and in a suitable state, it will then act like the machine
described, that is, compute (normally at a much slower rate) the same number
that the described machine would compute. Turing showed that such universal
machines can be designed. They of course are capable of computing any
computable number. Most digital computers, provided they have access to an
unlimited memory of some sort, are equivalent to universal Turing machines
and can, in principle, imitate any other computing machine and compute any
computable number.

The work of Turing has been generalized and reformulated in various ways. One
interesting generalization is the notion of A computability. This relates to a
class of Turing type machines which have the further feature that they can, at
certain points of the calculation, ask questions of a second "oracular"
device, and use the answers in further calculations. The oracular machine may
for example have answers to some of the unsolvable problems of ordinary Turing
machines, and consequently enable the solution of a larger class of problems.


LOGIC MACHINES

Boolean algebra can be used as a mathematical tool for studying the properties
of relay and switching circuits. Conversely, it is possible to solve problems
of Boolean algebra and formal logic by means of simple relay circuits. This
possibility has been exploited in a number of logic machines. A typical
machine of this kind, described by McCallum and Smith, can handle logical
relations involving up to seven classes or truth variables. The required
relations among these variables, given by the logical problem at hand, are
plugged into the machine by means of a number of "connective boxes." These
connective boxes are of six types and provide for the logical connectives
"not," "and," "or," "or else," "if and only if," and "if-then." When the
connections are complete, starting the machine causes it to hunt through the
2^7 = 128 combinations of the basic variables, stopping at all combinations
which satisfy the constraints. The machine also indicates the number of "true"
variables in each of these states.

McCallum and Smith give the following typical problem that may be solved on
the machine:

    It is known that salesmen always tell the truth and engineers always tell
    lies. G and E are salesmen. C states that D is an engineer. A declares
    that B affirms that C asserts that D says that E insists that F denies
    that G is a salesman. If A is an engineer, how many engineers are there?

A very suggestive feature in this machine is a selective feedback system for
hunting for particular solutions of the logical equations without an
exhaustive search through all possible combinations. This is achieved by
elements which sense whether or not a particular logical relation is
satisfied. If not, the truth variables involved in this relation are caused to
oscillate between their two possible values. Thus, variables appearing in
unsatisfied relations are continually changing, while those appearing only in
satisfied relations do not change. If ever all relations are simultaneously
satisfied the machine stops at that particular solution. Changing only the
variables in unsatisfied relations tends, in a general way, to lead to a
solution more rapidly than methodical exhaustion of all cases, but, as is
usually the case when feedback is introduced, leads to the possibility of
continual oscillation. McCallum and Smith point out the desirability of making
the changes of the variables due to the feedback unbalance as random as
possible, to enable the machine to escape from periodic paths through various
states of the relays.


GAME PLAYING MACHINES

The problem of designing game-playing machines is fascinating and has received
a good deal of attention. The rules of a game provide a sharply limited
environment in which a machine may operate, with a clearly defined goal for
its activities. The discrete nature of most games matches well the digital
computing techniques available without the cumbersome analog-digital
conversion necessary in translating our physical environment in the case of
manipulating and sensing machines.

Game playing machines may be roughly classified into types in order of
increasing sophistication:

1. Dictionary-type machines. Here the proper move of the machine is decided
   in advance for each possible situation that may arise in the game and
   listed in a "dictionary" or function table. When a particular position
   arises, the machine merely looks up the move in the dictionary. Because
   of the extravagant memory requirements, this rather uninteresting method
   is only feasible for exceptionally simple games, e.g., tic-tac-toe.

2. Machines using rigorously correct playing formulas. In some games, such as
   Nim, a complete mathematical theory is known, whereby it is possible to
   compute by a relatively simple formula, in any position that can be won, a
   suitable winning move. A mechanization of this formula provides a perfect
   game player for such games.

3. Machines applying general principles of approximate validity. In most
   games of interest to humans, no simple exact solution is known, but there
   are various general principles of play which hold in the majority of
   positions. This is true of such games as checkers, chess, bridge, poker
   and the like. Machines may be designed applying such general principles to
   the position at hand. Since the principles are not infallible, neither are
   the machines, as indeed, neither are humans.

4. Learning machines. Here the machine is given only the rules of the game
   and perhaps an elementary strategy of play, together with some method of
   improving this strategy through experience. Among the many methods that
   have been suggested for incorporation of learning we have:
   a) trial-and-error with retention of successful and elimination of
      unsuccessful possibilities;
   b) imitation of a more successful opponent;
   c) "teaching" by approval or disapproval, or by informing the machine
      of the nature of its mistakes; and finally
   d) self-analysis by the machine of its mistakes in an attempt to devise
      general principles.

Many examples of the first two types have been constructed and a few of the
third. The fourth type, learning game-players, is reminiscent of Mark Twain's
comment on the weather. Here is a real challenge for the programmer and
machine designer.

Two examples of the third category, machines applying general principles, may
be of interest. The first of these is a machine designed by E. F. Moore and
the writer for playing a commercial board game known as Hex. This game is
played on a board laid out in a regular hexagon pattern, the two players
alternately placing black and white pieces in unoccupied hexagons. The entire
board forms a rhombus and Black's goal is to connect the top and bottom of
this rhombus with a continuous chain of black pieces. White's goal is to
connect the two sides of the rhombus with a chain of white pieces.

After a study of this game, it was conjectured that a reasonably good move
could be made by the following process. A two-dimensional potential field is
set up corresponding to the playing board, with white pieces as positive
charges and black pieces as negative charges. The top and bottom of the board
are negative and the two sides positive. The move to be made corresponds to a
certain specified saddle point in this field. To test this strategy, an analog
device was constructed, consisting of a resistance network and gadgetry to
locate the saddle points. The general principle, with some improvements
suggested by experience, proved to be reasonably sound. With first move, the
machine won about seventy per cent of its games against human opponents. It
frequently surprised its designers by choosing odd-looking moves which, on
analysis, proved sound.

We normally think of computers as expert at long involved calculations and
poor in generalized value judgments. Paradoxically, the positional judgment of
this machine was good; its chief weakness was in end-game combinatorial play.
It is also curious that the Hex-player reversed the usual computing procedure
in that it solved a basically digital problem by an analog machine.

The game of checkers has recently been programmed into a general-purpose
computer, using a "general principle" approach. C. S. Strachey used a method
similar to one proposed by the writer for programming chess -- an
investigation of the possible variations for a few moves and a minimax
evaluation applied to the resulting positions. The following is a sample game
played by the checker program with notes by Strachey. (The white squares are
numbered consecutively, 0-31, from left to right and top to bottom. Numbers
in parentheses indicate captures.)

MACHINE          STRACHEY
11-15             23-18
7-11              21-17
8-12              20-16       a
12-21 (16)        25-16 (21)
9-14 !            b
18- 9 (14)
6-20 (16, 9)      c
27-23
2- 7              d
23-18
5- 8              18-14
8-13              e
17- 8 (13)
4-13 (8)          14- 9
1-5               f
9- 6
15-19             6- 1 (K)
5-9               1-6?        g
0- 5              h
6-15 (10)
11-25 (22, 15)    30-21 (25)
13-17             21-14 (17)
9-18 (14)         24-21
18-23             26-22
23-27             22-17
5-8               i
17-14
8-13              14- 9
19-23             9- 6
23-26             j
31-22 (26)
27-31 (K)         6- 2 (K)
7-10              2- 7
10-15             21-16       ?k
3-10 (7)          16- 9 (13)
10-14             9- 6
15-19             6- 2 (K)
31-27             m
2- 6
27-31             m
6-10
31-26             n
10-17 (14)
19-23             29-25
26-31             p

Notes:
a) An experiment on my part -- the only deliberate offer I made. I thought,
   wrongly, that it was quite safe.
b) Not foreseen by me.
c) Better than 5-21 (9, 17).
d) A random move (zero value). Shows the lack of a constructive plan.
e) Another random move of zero value. Actually rather good.
f) Bad. Ultimately allows me to make a King. 10-14 would have been better.
g) A bad slip on my part.
h) Taking full advantage of my slip.
i) Bad, unblocks the way to a King.
j) Sacrifice in order to get a King (not to stop me Kinging). A good move,
   but not possible before 19-23 had been made by chance.
k) Another bad slip on my part.
m) Purposeless. The strategy is failing badly in the end game.
n) Too late.
p) Futile. The game was stopped at this point as the outcome was obvious.

While obviously no world champion, the machine is certainly better than many
humans. Strachey points out various weaknesses in the program, particularly
in certain end-game positions, and suggests possible improvements.


LEARNING MACHINES

The concept of learning, like those of thinking, consciousness and other
psychological terms, is difficult to define precisely in a way acceptable to
the various interested parties. A rough formulation might be framed somewhat
as follows. Suppose that an organism or a machine can be placed in, or
connected to, a class of environments, and that there is a measure of
"success" or "adaptation" to the environment. Suppose further that this
measure is comparatively local in time, that is, that one can measure the
success over periods of time short compared to the life of the organism. If
this local measure of success tends to improve with the passage of time, for
the class of environments in question, we may say that the organism or
machine is learning to adapt to these environments relative to the measure of
success chosen.

Learning achieves a quantitative significance in terms of the broadness and
complexity of the class of environments to which the machine can adapt. A
chess playing machine whose frequency of wins increases during its operating
life may be said by this definition to be learning chess, the class of
environments being the chess players who oppose it, and the adaptation
measure, the winning of games.

A number of attempts have been made to construct simple learning machines. The
writer constructed a maze-solving device in which an arbitrary maze can be set
up in a five-by-five array of squares, by placing partitions as desired
between adjacent squares. A permanently magnetized "mouse," placed in the
maze, blunders about by a trial and error procedure, striking various
partitions and entering blind alleys until it eventually finds its way to the
"food box." Placed in the maze a second time, it will move directly to the
food box from any part of the maze that it has visited in its first
exploration, without errors or false moves. Placed in other parts of the
maze, it will blunder about until it reaches a previously explored part and
from there go directly to the goal. Meanwhile it will have added the
information about this part of the maze to its memory, and if placed at the
same point again will go directly to the goal. Thus by placing it in the
various unexplored parts of the maze, it eventually builds up a complete
pattern of information and is able to reach the goal directly from any point.

If the maze is now changed, the mouse first tries the old path, but on
striking a partition starts trying other directions and revising its memory
until it eventually reaches the goal by some other path. Thus it is able to
forget an old solution when the problem is changed.

The mouse is actually driven by an electromagnet moving beneath the maze. The
motion of the electromagnet is controlled by a relay circuit containing about
110 relays, organized into a memory and a computing circuit, somewhat after
that of a digital computer.

The maze-solver may be said to exhibit at a very primitive level the abilities
to (1) solve problems by trial and error, (2) repeat the solutions without
the errors, (3) add and correlate new information to a partial solution, (4)
forget a solution when it is no longer applicable.

Another approach to mechanized learning is that of suitably programming a
large-scale computer. A. E. Oettinger has developed two learning programs for
the Edsac computer in Cambridge, England. In the first of these, the machine
was divided into two parts, one part playing the role of a learning machine
and the second its environment. The environment represented abstractly a
number of stores in which various items might be purchased, different stores
stocking different classes of items. The learning machine faced the problem of
learning where various items might be purchased. Starting off with no previous
knowledge and a particular item to be obtained, it would search at random
among the stores until the item was located. When finally successful, it
noted in its memory where the article was found. Sent again for the same
article it will go directly to the shop where it previously obtained this
article.

A further feature of the program was the introduction of a bit of "curiosity"
in the learning machine. When it succeeded in finding article number j in a
particular shop it also noticed whether or not that shop carried articles j-1
and j+1 and recorded these facts in its memory.

The second learning program described by Oettinger is modeled more closely on
the conditioned reflex behavior of animals. A stimulus of variable intensity
can be applied to the machine in the form of an input integer. To this
stimulus the machine may respond in a number of different ways indicated by an
output integer. After the response, it is possible for the operator to
indicate approval or disapproval by introducing a third integer at a suitable
point. When the machine starts operating, its responses to stimuli are chosen
at random. Indication of approval improves the chances for the response
immediately preceding; indication of disapproval reduces this chance.
Furthermore, as a particular response is learned by conditioning it with
approval, the stimulus required for this response decreases. Finally, there is
a regular decay of thresholds when no approval follows a response.

Further embellishments of programs of this sort are limited only by the
capacity of the computer and the energy and ingenuity of the program designer.
Unfortunately, the elementary orders available in most large-scale computers
are poorly adapted to the logical requirements of learning programs, and the
machines are therefore used rather inefficiently. It may take a dozen or more
orders to represent a logically simple and frequently used operation occurring
in a learning routine.

Another type of learning machine has been constructed by D. W. Hagelbarger.
This is a machine designed to play the game of matching pennies against a
human opponent. On the front panel of the machine are a start button, two
lights marked + and -, and a key switch whose extreme positions are also
marked + and -. To play against the machine, the player chooses + or -, and
then pushes the start button. The machine will then light up one of the two
lights. If the machine matches the player, that is, lights the light
corresponding to the choice of the player, the machine wins; otherwise the
player wins. When the play is complete, the player registers by appropriate
movement of the key switch the choice he made.

The machine is so constructed as to analyze certain patterns in the players'
sequence of choices, and attempt to capitalize on these patterns when it finds
them. For example, some players have a tendency if they have won a round,
played the same thing and won again, to then change their choice. The machine
keeps count of these situations and, if such tendencies appear, plays in such
a way as to win. When such patterns do not appear the machine plays at random.

It has been found the machine wins about 55-60 per cent of the rounds, while
by chance or against an opponent that played strictly at random it would win
only 50 per cent of the time. It appears to be quite difficult for a human
being to produce a random sequence of pluses and minuses (to insure the 50 per
cent wins he is entitled to by the theory of games) and even more difficult to
actually beat the machine by leading it on to suspect patterns, and then
reversing the patterns.

A second penny-matching machine was designed by the writer, following the same
general strategy but using a different criterion to decide when to play at
random and when to assume that an apparent behavior pattern is significant.
After considerable discussion as to which of these two machines could beat the
other, and fruitless attempts to solve mathematically the very complicated
statistical problem involved when they are connected together, the problem was
relegated to experiment. A third small machine was constructed to act as
umpire and pass the information back and forth between the machines concerning
their readiness to make a move and the choices made. The three machines were
then plugged together and allowed to run for a few hours, to the accompaniment
of small side-bets and loud cheering.

Ironically, it turned out that the smaller, more precipitate of the two
machines consistently beat the larger, more deliberate one in a ratio of about
55 to 45.

A still different type of learning machine was devised by W. Ross Ashby who
christened it the Homeostat. Homeostasis, a word coined by Walter B. Cannon,
relates to an animal's ability to stabilize, by feedback, such biological
variables as body temperature, chemical concentrations in the blood stream,
etc. Ashby's device is a kind of self-stabilizing servo system. The first
model of the Homeostat contained four interconnected servos. The cross-
connections of these servos passed through four stepping switches and resistors
connected to the points of the steppers. Thus the effect of unbalance in the
other three loops on a particular loop depended on the values of the resistors
being contacted by the stepper associated with that loop. When any one of the
servos was sufficiently out of balance, a corresponding limit relay would
operate and cause the corresponding stepping switch to advance one point.

Now normally, a servo system with four degrees of freedom and random cross-
and self-gain figures will not be stable. If this occurred, one or more of the
stepping switches would advance and a new set of resistors would produce a new
set of gain figures. If this set again proved unstable, a further advance of
the steppers would occur until a stable situation was found. The values of the
resistors connected to the stepping switches were chosen by random means
(using a table of random numbers).

Facilities were provided for introducing many arbitrary changes or constraints
among the servos. For example, their connections could be reversed, two of
them could be tied together, one of them held at a fixed value, etc. Under all
these conditions, the mechanism was able to find a suitable stable position
with all the servos in balance. Considering the machine's goal to be that of
stabilizing the servos, and the environment to be represented by the various
alterations and constraints introduced by the operator, the Homeostat may be
said to adapt to its environment.

Certain features of the Homeostat are quite attractive as a basis for learning
machines and brain models. It seems in certain ways to do a bit more than was
explicitly designed into it. For example, it has been able to stabilize under
situations not anticipated when the machine was constructed. The use of
randomly chosen resistors is particularly suggestive and reminiscent of the
random connections among neurons in the brain.

Ashby, in fact, believes that the general principle embodied in the Homeostat,
which he calls ultra-stability, may underlie the operation of the animal
nervous system. One of the difficulties of a too direct application of this
theory is that, as Ashby points out, the time required for finding a stable
solution grows more or less exponentially with the number of degrees of
freedom. With only about 20 degrees of freedom, it would require many
lifetimes to stabilize one system. Attempts to overcome this difficulty lead
to rather involved conceptual constructions, so involved that it is extremely
difficult to decide just how effectively they would operate. Our mathematical
tools do not seem sufficiently sharp to solve these problems and further
experimental work would be highly desirable.


SELF-REPRODUCING MACHINES

In Erewhon the reproduction process in machines was pictured as a kind of
symbiotic co-operation between man and machines, the machines using man as an
intermediary to produce new machines when the older ones were worn out. Man's
part is akin to that of the bee in the fertilization of flowers.

Recently von Neumann has studied at an abstract level the problem of true
self-reproduction in machines, and has formulated two different mathematical
models of such "machines."

The first of these may be pictured somewhat as follows. "Machines" in the
model are constructed from a small number (of the order of twenty) types of
elementary components. These components have relatively simple functions, for
example, girders for structural purposes, elementary logical elements similar
to simplified relays or neurons for computing, sensing components for
detecting the presence of other elements, joining components (analogous to a
soldering iron) for fastening elements together, and so on. From these
elements, various types of machines may be "constructed." In particular, it is
possible to design a kind of universal construction machine, analogous to
Turing's universal computing machine. The universal constructing machine can
be fed a sequence of instructions, similar to the program of a digital
computer, which describe in a suitable code how to construct any other machine
that can be built with the elementary components. The universal constructing
machine will then proceed to hunt for the needed components in its environment
and build the machine described on its tape.

If the instructions to the universal constructing machine are a description of
the universal constructing machine itself, it will proceed to build a copy of
itself, and would be a self-reproducing machine except for the fact that the
copy is not yet supplied with a set of instructions. By adding to the
universal machine what amounts to a tape-copying device and a relatively
simple controlling device, a true self-reproducing machine is obtained. The
instructions now describe the original universal machine with the addition of
the tape reproducer and the controlling device. The first operation of the
machine is to reproduce this entity. The controlling device then sends the
instruction tape through the tape reproducer to obtain a copy, and places this
copy in the second machine. Finally, it turns the second machine on, which
starts reading its instructions and building a third copy, and so ad
infinitum.

More recently, von Neumann has turned from this somewhat mechanical model to a
more abstract self-reproducing structure -- one based on a two-dimensional
array of elementary "cells." Each cell is of relatively simple internal
structure, having, in fact, something like thirty possible internal states,
and each cell communicates directly only with its four neighbors. The state of
a cell at the next (quantized) step in time depends only on the current state
of the cell and the states of its four neighbors. By a suitable choice of
these state transitions it is possible to set up a system yielding a kind of
self-reproducing structure. A group of contiguous cells can act as an organic
unit and operate on nearby quiescent cells in such a way as to organize a
group of them into an identical unit.

This second model avoids many of the somewhat extraneous problems of locating,
recognizing and positioning components that were inherent in the first model,
and consequently leads to a simpler mathematical formulation. Furthermore, it
has certain analogies with various chemical and biological problems, such as
those of crystal and gene reproduction, while the first model is more closely
related to the problem of large scale animal reproduction.

An interesting concept arising from both models is the notion of a critical
complexity required for self-reproduction. In either case, only sufficiently
complicated "machines" will be capable of self-reproduction. Von Neumann
estimates the order of tens of thousands of components or cells to obtain this
property. Less complicated structures can only construct simpler "machines"
than themselves, while more complicated ones may be capable of a kind of
evolutionary improvement leading to still more complicated organisms.


CHALLENGE TO THE READER

We hope that the foregoing sample of non-numerical computers may have
stimulated the reader's appetite for research in this field. The problem of
how the brain works and how machines may be designed to simulate its activity
is surely one of the most important and difficult facing current science.
Innumerable questions demand clarification, ranging from experimental and
development work on the one hand to purely mathematical research on the other.

Can we design significant machines where the connections are locally random?
Can we organize machines into a hierarchy of levels, as the brain appears to
be organized, with the learning of the machine gradually progressing up
through the hierarchy? Can we program a digital computer so that (eventually)
99 per cent of the orders it follows are written by the computer itself,
rather than the few per cent in current programs? Can a self-repairing machine
be built that will locate and repair faults in its own components (including
components in the maintenance part of the machine)? What does a random element
add in generality to a Turing machine? Can manipulative and sensory devices
functionally comparable to the hand and eye be developed and coordinated with
computers? Can either of von Neumann's self-reproducing models be translated
into hardware? Can more satisfactory theories of learning be formulated? Can a
machine be constructed which will design other machines, given only their
broad functional characteristics? What is a really good set of orders in a
digital computer for general purpose non-numerical computation? How can a
computer memory be organized to learn and remember by association, in a manner
similar to the human brain?

We suggest these typical questions, and the entire automata field, as a
challenge to the reader. Here is research territory ripe for scientific
prospectors. It is not a matter of reworking old operations, but of locating
the rich new veins and perhaps in some cases merely picking up the surface
nuggets.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

W. R. Ashby, Design for a Brain (New York, Wiley, 1951).

E. C. Berkeley, Giant Brains, or Machines That Think (New York, Wiley, 1949).

S. Butler, Erewhon and Erewhon Revisited (New York, Modern Library Edition,
1927).

J. Diebold, Automation (New York, Van Nostrand, 1952).

A. S. Householder and H. D. Landahl, Mathematical Biophysics of the Central
Nervous System (Bloomington, Principia Press, 1945) pp. 103-110.

S. C. Kleene, Representation of Events in Nerve Nets and Finite Automata,
Rand Corporation Memorandum RM-704, 1951.

D. M. McCallum and J. B. Smith, "Mechanized Reasoning," Electronic
Engineering (April, 1951).

Warren S. McCulloch, and Walter Pitts, "A Logical Calculus of the Ideas
Immanent in Nervous Activity," Bull. Math. Biophysics, (1943) vol. 5,
pp. 115-133.

W. S. McCulloch, "The Brain as a Computing Machine," Electrical Engineering
(June, 1949).

John Meszar, "Switching Systems as Mechanical Brains," Bell Labs. Record,
(1953) vol. 31, pp. 63-69.

A. Oettinger, "Programming a Digital Computer to Learn," Phil. Mag.,
(December, 1952) vol. 43, pp. 1243-1263.

W. Pease, "An Automatic Machine Tool," Scientific American, (September, 1952)
vol. 187, pp. 101-115.

C. E. Shannon, Presentation of a Maze-Solving Machine, Transactions of the
Eighth Cybernetics Conference, Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, New York, 1952,
pp. 173-180.

C. E. Shannon, "Programming a Computer for Playing Chess," Phil. Mag.,
(March, 1950) vol. 41, pp. 256-275.

C. S. Strachey, "Logical or Non-Mathematical Programmes," Proc. of the Assn.
for Computing Machinery, Toronto (1952), pp. 46-49.

A. M. Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," Mind, (1950) vol. 59,
pp. 433-460.

A. M. Turing, On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the
Entscheidungsproblem, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., (1936) vol. 24, pp. 230-265.

J. Von Neumann, "The General and Logical Theory of Automata," from Cerebral
Mechanisms in Behavior, (New York, Wiley, 1951), pp. 1-41.

J. Von Neumann, Probabilistic Logics, California Institute of Technology,
1952.

N. Wiener, Cybernetics (New York, Wiley, 1948).
