THE  MATHEMATICAL  THEORY 
OF  COMMUNICATION 

SHANNON  & WEAVER 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  THEORY 
OF  COMMUNICATION 

by  Claude  E.  Shannon  and  Warren  Weaver 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  PRESS  ■ URBANA  • 1964 


Tenth  printing,  1964 

Also  printed  in  paperbound  edition,  1963  and  1964 


First  paperbound  edition,  1963 


Copyright  1949  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  University  of  Illinois. 
Manufactured  in  the  United  States  of  America. 

Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  No.  49-11922. 


Preface 


Recent  years  have  witnessed  considerable  research  activity  in 
communication  theory  by  a number  of  workers  both  here  and 
abroad.  In  view  of  the  widespread  interest  in  this  field,  Dean 
L.  N.  Ridenour  suggested  the  present  volume  consisting  of  two 
papers  on  this  subject. 

The  first  paper  has  not  previously  been  printed  in  its  present 
form,  although  a condensation  appeared  in  Scientific  American, 
July,  1949.  In  part,  it  consists  of  an  expository  introduction  to 
the  general  theory  and  may  well  be  read  first  by  those  desiring  a 
panoramic  view  of  the  field  before  entering  into  the  more  mathe- 
matical aspects.  In  addition,  some  ideas  are  suggested  for 
broader  application  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  communi- 
cation theory. 

The  second  paper  is  reprinted  from  the  Bell  System  Technical 
Journal,  July  and  October,  1948,  with  no  changes  except  the  cor- 
rection of  minor  errata  and  the  inclusion  of  some  additional 
references.  It  is  intended  that  subsequent  developments  in  the 
field  will  be  treated  in  a projected  work  dealing  with  more  general 
aspects  of  information  theory. 

It  gives  us  pleasure  to  express  our  thanks  to  Dean  Ridenour  for 
making  this  book  possible,  and  to  the  University  of  Illinois  Press 
for  their  splendid  cooperation. 


September,  1949 


C.  E.  Shannon 
W.  Weaver 


CONTENTS 


Recent  Contributions  to  the  Mathematical  Theory 
of  Communication 1 

Warren  Weaver,  The  Rockefeller  Foundation 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication  ...  29 

Claude  E.  Shannon,  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories 


RECENT  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  MATHEMATICAL 
THEORY  OF  COMMUNICATION 


By  Warren  Weaver 


Introductory  Note  on  the  General  Setting 
of  the  Analytical  Communication  Studies' 


1.1.  Communication 

The  word  communication  will  be  used  here  in  a very  broad  sense 
to  include  all  of  the  procedures  by  which  one  mind  may  affect 
another.  This,  of  course,  involves  not  only  written  and  oral 
speech,  but  also  music,  the  pictorial  arts,  the  theatre,  the  ballet, 
and  in  fact  all  human  behavior.  In  some  connections  it  may  be 
desirable  to  use  a still  broader  definition  of  communication, 
namely,  one  which  would  include  the  procedures  by  means  of 
which  one  mechanism  (say  automatic  equipment  to  track  an 
airplane  and  to  compute  its  probable  future  positions)  affects 
another  mechanism  (say  a guided  missile  chasing  this  airplane). 

The  language  of  this  memorandum  will  often  appear  to  refer  to 
the  special,  but  still  very  broad  and  important,  field  of  the  com- 
munication of  speech;  but  practically  everything  said  applies 

1 This  paper  is  written  in  three  main  sections.  In  the  first  and  third,  W.  W. 
is  responsible  both  for  the  ideas  and  the  form.  The  middle  section,  namely 
“2),  Communication  Problems  of  Level  A”  is  an  interpretation  of  mathe- 
matical papers  by  Dr.  Claude  E.  Shannon  of  the  Bell  Telephone  Labora- 
tories. Dr.  Shannon’s  work  roots  back,  as  von  Neumann  has  pointed  out, 
to  Boltzmann’s  observation,  in  some  of  his  work  on  statistical  physics 
(1894),  that  entropy  is  related  to  “missing  information,”  inasmuch  as  it  is 
related  to  the  number  of  alternatives  which  remain  possible  to  a physical 
system  after  all  the  macroscopically  observable  information  concerning  it 
has  been  recorded.  L.  Szilard  (Zsch.  f.  Phys.  Vol.  53,  1925)  extended  this 
idea  to  a general  discussion  of  information  in  physics,  and  von  Neumann 
{Math.  Foundation  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  Berlin,  1932,  Chap.  V)  treated 
information  in  quantum  mechanics  and  particle  physics.  Dr.  Shannon’s 
work  connects  more  directly  with  certain  ideas  developed  some  twenty 
years  ago  by  H.  Nyquist  and  R.  V.  L.  Hartley,  both  of  the  Bell  Labora- 
tories; and  Dr.  Shannon  has  himself  emphasized  that  communication  theory 
owes  a great  debt  to  Professor  Norbert  Wiener  for  much  of  its  basic 
philosophy.  Professor  Wiener,  on  the  other  hand,  points  out  that  Shannon’s 
early  work  on  switching  and  mathematical  logic  antedated  his  own  interest 
in  this  field;  and  generously  adds  that  Shannon  certainly  deserves  credit 
for  independent  development  of  such  fundamental  aspects  of  the  theory  as 
the  introduction  of  entropic  ideas.  Shannon  has  naturally  been  specially 
concerned  to  push  the  applications  to  engineering  communication,  while 
Wiener  has  been  more  concerned  with  biological  application  (central 
nervous  system  phenomena,  etc.). 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


equally  well  to  music  of  any  sort,  and  to  still  or  moving  pictures, 
as  in  television. 

1.2.  Three  Levels  of  Communications  Problems 

Relative  to  the  broad  subject  of  communication,  there  seem  to  be 
problems  at  three  levels.  Thus  it  seems  reasonable  to  ask,  serially: 

Level  A.  How  accurately  can  the  symbols  of  communication  be 
transmitted?  (The  technical  problem.) 

Level  B.  How  precisely  do  the  transmitted  symbols  convey  the 
desired  meaning?  (The  semantic  problem.) 

Level  C.  How  effectively  does  the  received  meaning  affect  con- 
duct in  the  desired  way?  (The  effectiveness  problem.) 

The  technical  problems  are  concerned  with  the  accuracy  of 
transference  from  sender  to  receiver  of  sets  of  symbols  (written 
speech) , or  of  a continuously  varying  signal  (telephonic  or  radio 
transmission  of  voice  or  music) , or  of  a continuously  varying  two- 
dimensional  pattern  (television),  etc.  Mathematically,  the  first 
involves  transmission  of  a finite  set  of  discrete  symbols,  the 
second  the  transmission  of  one  continuous  function  of  time,  and 
the  third  the  transmission  of  many  continuous  functions  of  time 
or  of  one  continuous  function  of  time  and  of  two  space  coordi- 
nates. 

The  semantic  problems  are  concerned  with  the  identity,  or  sat- 
isfactorily close  approximation,  in  the  interpretation  of  meaning 
by  the  receiver,  as  compared  with  the  intended  meaning  of  the 
sender.  This  is  a very  deep  and  involved  situation,  even  when  one 
deals  only  with  the  relatively  simpler  problems  of  communicating 
through  speech. 

One  essential  complication  is  illustrated  by  the  remark  that  if 
Mr.  X is  suspected  not  to  understand  what  Mr.  Y says,  then  it  is 
theoretically  not  possible,  by  having  Mr.  Y do  nothing  but  talk 
further  with  Mr.  X,  completely  to  clarify  this  situation  in  any 
finite  time.  If  Mr.  Y says  “Do  you  now  understand  me?”  and 
Mr.  X says  “Certainly,  I do,”  this  is  not  necessarily  a certifica- 
tion that  understanding  has  been  achieved.  It  may  just  be  that 
Mr.  X did  not  understand  the  question.  If  this  sounds  silly,  try 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




it  again  as  “Czy  pan  mnie  rozumie?”  with  the  answer  “Hai 
wakkate  imasu.”  I think  that  this  basic  difficulty2  is,  at  least  in 
the  restricted  field  of  speech  communication,  reduced  to  a toler- 
able size  (but  never  completely  eliminated)  by  “explanations” 
which  (a)  are  presumably  never  more  than  approximations  to  the 
ideas  being  explained,  but  which  (b)  are  understandable  since 
they  are  phrased  in  language  which  has  previously  been  made 
reasonably  clear  by  operational  means.  For  example,  it  does  not 
take  long  to  make  the  symbol  for  “yes”  in  any  language  opera- 
tionally understandable. 

The  semantic  problem  has  wide  ramifications  if  one  thinks  of 
communication  in  general.  Consider,  for  example,  the  meaning  to 
a Russian  of  a U.S.  newsreel  picture. 

The  effectiveness  problems  are  concerned  with  the  success  with 
which  the  meaning  conveyed  to  the  receiver  leads  to  the  desired 
conduct  on  his  part.  It  may  seem  at  first  glance  undesirably 
narrow  to  imply  that  the  purpose  of  all  communication  is  to  influ- 
ence the  conduct  of  the  receiver.  But  with  any  reasonably  broad 
definition  of  conduct,  it  is  clear  that  communication  either  affects 
conduct  or  is  without  any  discernible  and  probable  effect  at  all. 

The  problem  of  effectiveness  involves  aesthetic  considerations 
in  the  case  of  the  fine  arts.  In  the  case  of  speech,  written  or  oral, 
it  involves  considerations  which  range  all  the  way  from  the  mere 
mechanics  of  style,  through  all  the  psychological  and  emotional 
aspects  of  propaganda  theory,  to  those  value  judgments  which  are 
necessary  to  give  useful  meaning  to  the  words  “success”  and 
“desired”  in  the  opening  sentence  of  this  section  on  effectiveness. 

The  effectiveness  problem  is  closely  interrelated  with  the  se- 
mantic problem,  and  overlaps  it  in  a rather  vague  way;  and 

2 “When  Pfungst  (1911)  demonstrated  that  the  horses  of  Elberfeld,  who 
were  showing  marvelous  linguistic  and  mathematical  ability,  were  merely 
reacting  to  movements  of  the  trainer’s  head,  Mr.  Krall  (1911),  their  owner, 
met  the  criticism  in  the  most  direct  manner.  He  asked  the  horses  whether 
they  could  see  such  small  movements  and  in  answer  they  spelled  out  an 
emphatic  ‘No.’  Unfortunately  we  cannot  all  be  so  sure  that  our  questions 
are  understood  or  obtain  such  clear  answers.”  See  Lashley,  K.  S.,  “Per- 
sistent Problems  in  the  Evolution  of  Mind”  in  Quarterly  Review  of  Biology, 
v.  24,  March,  1949,  p.  28. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


there  is  in  fact  overlap  between  all  of  the  suggested  categories  of 
problems. 

1.3.  Comments 

So  stated,  one  would  be  inclined  to  think  that  Level  A is  a rela- 
tively superficial  one,  involving  only  the  engineering  details  of 
good  design  of  a communication  system;  while  B and  C seem  to 
contain  most  if  not  all  of  the  philosophical  content  of  the  general 
problem  of  communication. 

The  mathematical  theory  of  the  engineering  aspects  of  com- 
munication, as  developed  chiefly  by  Claude  Shannon  at  the  Bell 
Telephone  Laboratories,  admittedly  applies  in  the  first  instance 
only  to  problem  A,  namely,  the  technical  problem  of  accuracy  of 
transference  of  various  types  of  signals  from  sender  to  receiver. 
But  the  theory  has,  I think,  a deep  significance  which  proves  that 
the  preceding  paragraph  is  seriously  inaccurate.  Part  of  the  sig- 
nificance of  the  new  theory  comes  from  the  fact  that  levels  B and 
C,  above,  can  make  use  only  of  those  signal  accuracies  which  turn 
out  to  be  possible  when  analyzed  at  Level  A.  Thus  any  limita- 
tions discovered  in  the  theory  at  Level  A necessarily  apply  to 
levels  B and  C.  But  a larger  part  of  the  significance  comes  from 
the  fact  that  the  analysis  at  Level  A discloses  that  this  level  over- 
laps the  other  levels  more  than  one  could  possible  naively  suspect. 
Thus  the  theory  of  Level  A is,  at  least  to  a significant  degree,  also 
a theory  of  levels  B and  C.  I hope  that  the  succeeding  parts  of 
this  memorandum  will  illuminate  and  justify  these  last  remarks. 


Communication  Problems  at  Level  A 


2.1.  A Communication  System  and  Its  Problems 

The  communication  system  considered  may  be  symbolically  rep- 
resented as  follows: 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




INFORMATION 

SOURCE  TRANSMITTER  RECEIVER  DESTINATION 


NOISE 

SOURCE 


The  information  source  selects  a desired  message  out  of  a set  of 
possible  messages  (this  is  a particularly  important  remark,  which 
requires  considerable  explanation  later).  The  selected  message 
may  consist  of  written  or  spoken  words,  or  of  pictures,  music,  etc. 

The  transmitter  changes  this  message  into  the  signal  which  is 
actually  sent  over  the  communication  channel  from  the  transmit- 
ter to  the  receiver.  In  the  case  of  telephony,  the  channel  is  a wire, 
the  signal  a varying  electrical  current  on  this  wire;  the  trans- 
mitter is  the  set  of  devices  (telephone  transmitter,  etc.)  which 
change  the  sound  pressure  of  the  voice  into  the  varying  electrical 
current.  In  telegraphy,  the  transmitter  codes  written  words  into 
sequences  of  interrupted  currents  of  varying  lengths  (dots,  dashes, 
spaces).  In  oral  speech,  the  information  source  is  the  brain,  the 
transmitter  is  the  voice  mechanism  producing  the  varying  sound 
pressure  (the  signal)  which  is  transmitted  through  the  air  (the 
channel).  In  radio,  the  channel  is  simply  space  (or  the  aether,  if 
any  one  still  prefers  that  antiquated  and  misleading  word),  and 
the  signal  is  the  electromagnetic  wave  which  is  transmitted. 

The  receiver  is  a sort  of  inverse  transmitter,  changing  the  trans- 
mitted signal  back  into  a message,  and  handing  this  message  on 
to  the  destination.  When  I talk  to  you,  my  brain  is  the  informa- 
tion source,  yours  the  destination;  my  vocal  system  is  the  trans- 
mitter, and  your  ear  and  the  associated  eighth  nerve  is  the 
receiver. 

In  the  process  of  being  transmitted,  it  is  unfortunately  charac- 
teristic that  certain  things  are  added  to  the  signal  which  were  not 
intended  by  the  information  source.  These  unwanted  additions 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


may  be  distortions  of  sound  (in  telephony,  for  example)  or  static 
(in  radio),  or  distortions  in  shape  or  shading  of  picture  (tele- 
vision), or  errors  in  transmission  (telegraphy  or  facsimile),  etc. 
All  of  these  changes  in  the  transmitted  signal  are  called  noise. 

The  kind  of  questions  which  one  seeks  to  ask  concerning  such 
a communication  system  are: 

a.  How  does  one  measure  amount  of  information f 

b.  How  does  one  measure  the  capacity  of  a communication 
channel? 

c.  The  action  of  the  transmitter  in  changing  the  message  into 
the  signal  often  involves  a coding  process.  What  are  the  charac- 
teristics of  an  efficient  coding  process?  And  when  the  coding  is 
as  efficient  as  possible,  at  what  rate  can  the  channel  convey 
information? 

d.  What  are  the  general  characteristics  of  noise f How  does 
noise  affect  the  accuracy  of  the  message  finally  received  at  the 
destination?  How  can  one  minimize  the  undesirable  effects  of 
noise,  and  to  what  extent  can  they  be  eliminated? 

e.  If  the  signal  being  transmitted  is  continuous  (as  in  oral 
speech  or  music)  rather  than  being  formed  of  discrete  symbols 
(as  in  written  speech,  telegraphy,  etc.) , how  does  this  fact  affect 
the  problem? 

We  will  now  state,  without  any  proofs  and  with  a minimum 
of  mathematical  terminology,  the  main  results  which  Shannon  has 
obtained. 

2.2.  Information 

The  word  information,  in  this  theory,  is  used  in  a special  sense 
that  must  not  be  confused  with  its  ordinary  usage.  In  particular, 
information  must  not  be  confused  with  meaning. 

In  fact,  two  messages,  one  of  which  is  heavily  loaded  with 
meaning  and  the  other  of  which  is  pure  nonsense,  can  be  exactly 
equivalent,  from  the  present  viewpoint,  as  regards  information. 
It  is  this,  undoubtedly,  that  Shannon  means  when  he  says  that 
“the  semantic  aspects  of  communication  are  irrelevant  to  the  en- 
gineering aspects.’’  But  this  does  not  mean  that  the  engineering 
aspects  are  necessarily  irrelevant  to  the  semantic  aspects. 

To  be  sure,  this  word  information  in  communication  theory 
relates  not  so  much  to  what  you  dp  say,  as  to  what  you  could  say. 


Some  Recent  Contributions : Weaver 




That  is,  information  is  a measure  of  one’s  freedom  of  choice  when 
one  selects  a message.  If  one  is  confronted  with  a very  elementary 
situation  where  he  has  to  choose  one  of  two  alternative  messages, 
then  it  is  arbitrarily  said  that  the  information,  associated  with 
this  situation,  is  unity.  Note  that  it  is  misleading  (although  often 
convenient)  to  say  that  one  or  the  other  message  conveys  unit 
information.  The  concept  of  information  applies  not  to  the  indi- 
vidual messages  (as  the  concept  of  meaning  would),  but  rather 
to  the  situation  as  a whole,  the  unit  information  indicating  that 
in  this  situation  one  has  an  amount  of  freedom  of  choice,  in 
selecting  a message,  which  it  is  convenient  "to  regard  as  a standard 
or  unit  amount. 

The  two  messages  between  which  one  must  choose,  in  such  a 
selection,  can  be  anything  one  likes.  One  might  be  the  text  of  the 
King  James  Version  of  the  Bible,  and  the  other  might  be  “Yes.” 
The  transmitter  might  code  these  two  messages  so  that  '‘zero”  is 
the  signal  for  the  first,  and  "one”  the  signal  for  the  second;  or  so 
that  a closed  circuit  (current  flowing)  is  the  signal  for  the  first, 
and  an  open  circuit  (no  current  flowing)  the  signal  for  the  sec- 
ond. Thus  the  two  positions,  closed  and  open,  of  a simple  relay, 
might  correspond  to  the  two  messages. 

To  be  somewhat  more  definite,  the  amount  of  information  is 
defined,  in  the  simplest  cases,  to  be  measured  by  the  logarithm  of 
the  number  of  available  choices.  It  being  convenient  to  use  log- 
arithms3 to  the  base  2,  rather  than  common  or  Briggs’  logarithm 
to  the  base  10,  the  information,  when  there  are  only  two  choices, 
is  proportional  to  the  logarithm  of  2 to  the  base  2.  But  this  is 
unity ; so  that  a two-choice  situation  is  characterized  by  informa- 
tion of  unity,  as  has  already  been  stated  above.  This  unit  of 
information  is  called  a "bit,”  this  word,  first  suggested  by  John 
W.  Tukey,  being  a condensation  of  "binary  digit.”  When  num- 
bers are  expressed  in  the  binary  system  there  are  only  two  digits, 
namely  0 and  1;  just  as  ten  digits,  0 to  9 inclusive,  are  used  in 
the  decimal  number  system  which  employs  10  as  a base.  Zero 
and  one  may  be  taken  symbolically  to  represent  any  two  choices, 
as  noted  above;  so  that  "binary  digit”  or  "bit”  is  natural  to  asso- 
ciate with  the  two-choice  situation  which  has  unit  information. 

If  one  has  available  say  16  alternative  messages  among  which 

* When  m®  = y,  then  x is  said  to  be  the  logarithm  of  y to  the  base  m. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


he  is  equally  free  to  choose,  then  since  16  = 24  so  that  log2  16  = 4, 
one  says  that  this  situation  is  characterized  by  4 bits  of  infor- 
mation. 

It  doubtless  seems  queer,  when  one  first  meets  it,  that  informa- 
tion is  defined  as  the  logarithm  of  the  number  of  choices.  But  in 
the  unfolding  of  the  theory,  it  becomes  more  and  more  obvious 
that  logarithmic  measures  are  in  fact  the  natural  ones.  At  the 
moment,  only  one  indication  of  this  will  be  given.  It  was  men- 
tioned above  that  one  simple  on-or-off  relay,  with  its  two  posi- 
tions labeled,  say,  0 and  1 respectively,  can  handle  a unit  infor- 
mation situation,  in  which  there  are  but  two  message  choices.  If 
one  relay  can  handle  unit  information,  how  much  can  be  handled 
by  say  three  relays?  It  seems  very  reasonable  to  want  to  say 
that  three  relays  could  handle  three  times  as  much  information 
as  one.  And  this  indeed  is  the  way  it  works  out  if  one  uses  the 
logarithmic  definition  of  information.  For  three  relays  are  capa- 
ble of  responding  to  23  or  8 choices,  which  symbolically  might  be 
written  as  000,  001,  Oil,  010,  100,  110,  101,  111,  in  the  first  of 
which  all  three  relays  are  open,  and  in  the  last  of  which  all  three 
relays  are  closed.  And  the  logarithm  to  the  base  2 of  23  is  3,  so 
that  the  logarithmic  measure  assigns  three  units  of  information 
to  this  situation,  just  as  one  would  wish.  Similarly,  doubling  the 
available  time  squares  the  number  of  possible  messages,  and 
doubles  the  logarithm;  and  hence  doubles  the  information  if  it  is 
measured  logarithmically. 

The  remarks  thus  far  relate  to  artificially  simple  situations 
where  the  information  source  is  free  to  choose  only  between  sev- 
eral definite  messages  — like  a man  picking  out  one  of  a set  of 
standard  birthday  greeting  telegrams.  A more  natural  and  more 
important  situation  is  that  in  which  the  information  source  makes 
a sequence  of  choices  from  some  set  of  elementary  symbols,  the 
selected  sequence  then  forming  the  message.  Thus  a man  may 
pick  out  one  word  after  another,  these  individually  selected  words 
then  adding  up  to  form  the  message. 

At  this  point  an  important  consideration  which  has  been  in  the 
background,  so  far,  comes  to  the  front  for  major  attention. 
Namely,  the  role  which  probability  plays  in  the  generation  of  the 
message.  For  as  the  successive  symbols  are  chosen,  these  choices 
are,  at  least  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  communication  system, 


Some  Recent  Contributions : Weaver 




governed  by  probabilities;  and  in  fact  by  probabilities  which  are 
not  independent,  but  which,  at  any  stage  of  the  process,  depend 
upon  the  preceding  choices.  Thus,  if  we  are  concerned  with 
English  speech,  and  if  the  last  symbol  chosen  is  “the,”  then  the 
probability  that  the  next  word  be  an  article,  or  a verb  form  other 
than  a verbal,  is  very  small.  This  probabilistic  influence  stretches 
over  more  than  two  words,  in  fact.  After  the  three  words  “in  the 
event”  the  probability  for  “that”  as  the  next  word  is  fairly  high, 
and  for  “elephant”  as  the  next  word  is  very  low. 

That  there  are  probabilities  which  exert  a certain  degree  of  con- 
trol over  the  English  language  also  becomes  obvious  if  one  thinks, 
for  example,  of  the  fact  that  in  our  language  the  dictionary  con- 
tains no  words  whatsoever  in  which  the  initial  letter  j is  followed 
by  b,  c,  d,  f,  g,  j,  k,  l,  q,  r,  t,  v,  w,  x,  or  z;  so  that  the  probability 
is  actually  zero  that  an  initial  j be  followed  by  any  of  these 
letters.  Similarly,  anyone  would  agree  that  the  probability  is  low 
for  such  a sequence  of  words  as  “Constantinople  fishing  nasty 
pink.”  Incidentally,  it  is  low,  but  not  zero;  for  it  is  perfectly 
possible  to  think  of  a passage  in  which  one  sentence  closes  with 
“Constantinople  fishing,”  and  the  next  begins  with  “Nasty  pink.” 
And  we  might  observe  in  passing  that  the  unlikely  four-word 
sequence  under  discussion  has  occurred  in  a single  good  English 
sentence,  namely  the  one  above. 

A system  which  produces  a sequence  of  symbols  (which  may, 
of  course,  be  letters  or  musical  notes,  say,  rather  than  words) 
according  to  certain  probabilities  is  called  a stochastic  process , 
and  the  special  case  of  a stochastic  process  in  which  the  proba- 
bilities depend  on  the  previous  events,  is  called  a Markoff  process 
or  a Markoff  chain.  Of  the  Markoff  processes  which  might  con- 
ceivably generate  messages,  there  is  a special  class  which  is  of 
primary  importance  for  communication  theory,  these  being  what 
are  called  ergodic  processes.  The  analytical  details  here  are  com- 
plicated and  the  reasoning  so  deep  and  involved  that  it  has  taken 
some  of  the  best  efforts  of  the  best  mathematicians  to  create  the 
associated  theory;  but  the  rough  nature  of  an  ergodic  process  is 
easy  to  understand.  It  is  one  which  produces  a sequence  of  sym- 
bols which  would  be  a poll-taker’s  dream,  because  any  reasonably 
large  sample  tends  to  be  representative  of  the  sequence  as  a 
whole.  Suppose  that  two  persons  choose  samples  in  different 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


ways,  and  study  what  trends  their  statistical  properties  would 
show  as  the  samples  become  larger.  If  the  situation  is  ergodic, 
then  those  two  persons,  however  they  may  have  chosen  their 
samples,  agree  in  their  estimates  of  the  properties  of  the  whole. 
Ergodic  systems,  in  other  words,  exhibit  a particularly  safe  and 
comforting  sort  of  statistical  regularity. 

Now  let  us  return  to  the  idea  of  information.  When  we  have 
an  information  source  which  is  producing  a message  by  succes- 
sively selecting  discrete  symbols  (letters,  words,  musical  notes, 
spots  of  a certain  size,  etc.),  the  probability  of  choice  of  the 
various  symbols  at  one  stage  of  the  process  being  dependent  on 
the  previous  choices  (i.e.,  a Markoff  process),  what  about  the 
information  associated  with  this  procedure? 

The  quantity  which  uniquely  meets  the  natural  requirements 
that  one  sets  up  for  “information”  turns  out  to  be  exactly  that 
which  is  known  in  thermodynamics  as  entropy.  It  is  expressed  in 
terms  of  the  various  probabilities  involved  — those  of  getting  to 
certain  stages  in  the  process  of  forming  messages,  and  the  proba- 
bilities that,  when  in  those  stages,  certain  symbols  be  chosen 
next.  The  formula,  moreover,  involves  the  logarithm  of  probabil- 
ities, so  that  it  is  a natural  generalization  of  the  logarithmic 
measure  spoken  of  above  in  connection  with  simple  cases. 

To  those  who  have  studied  the  physical  sciences,  it  is  most 
significant  that  an  entropy-like  expression  appears  in  the  theory 
as  a measure  of  information.  Introduced  by  Clausius  nearly  one 
hundred  years  ago,  closely  associated  with  the  name  of  Boltz- 
mann, and  given  deep  meaning  by  Gibbs  in  his  classic  work  on 
statistical  mechanics,  entropy  has  become  so  basic  and  pervasive 
a concept  that  Eddington  remarks  “The  law  that  entropy  always 
increases  — the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  — holds,  I think, 
the  supreme  position  among  the  laws  of  Nature.” 

In  the  physical  sciences,  the  entropy  associated  with  a situa- 
tion is  a measure  of  the  degree  of  randomness,  or  of  “shuffled- 
ness”  if  you  will,  in  the  situation;  and  the  tendency  of  physical 
systems  to  become  less  and  less  organized,  to  become  more  and 
more  perfectly  shuffled,  is  so  basic  that  Eddington  argues  that 
it  is  primarily  this  tendency  which  gives  time  its  arrow  — which 
would  reveal  to  us,  for  example,  whether  a movie  of  the  physical 
world  is  being  run  forward  or  backward. 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 


IS 


Thus  when  one  meets  the  concept  of  entropy  in  communication 
theory,  he  has  a right  to  be  rather  excited  — a right  to  suspect 
that  one  has  hold  of  something  that  may  turn  out  to  be  basic  and 
important.  That  information  be  measured  by  entropy  is,  after  all, 
natural  when  we  remember  that  information,  in  communication 
theory,  is  associated  with  the  amount  of  freedom  of  choice  we 
have  in  constructing  messages.  Thus  for  a communication  source 
one  can  say,  just  as  he  would  also  say  it  of  a thermodynamic 
ensemble,  “This  situation  is  highly  organized,  it  is  not  character- 
ized by  a large  degree  of  randomness  or  of  choice  — that  is  to  say, 
the  information  (or  the  entropy)  is  low.”  We  will  return  to  this 
point  later,  for  unless  I am  quite  mistaken,  it  is  an  important 
aspect  of  the  more  general  significance  of  this  theory. 

Having  calculated  the  entropy  (or  the  information,  or  the 
freedom  of  choice)  of  a certain  information  source,  one  can  com- 
pare this  to  the  maximum  value  this  entropy  could  have,  subject 
only  to  the  condition  that  the  source  continue  to  employ  the  same 
symbols.  The  ratio  of  the  actual  to  the  maximum  entropy  is 
called  the  relative  entropy  of  the  source.  If  the  relative  entropy 
of  a certain  source  is,  say  .8,  this  roughly  means  that  this  source 
is,  in  its  choice  of  symbols  to  form  a message,  about  80  per  cent 
as  free  as  it  could  possibly  be  with  these  same  symbols.  One 
minus  the  relative  entropy  is  called  the  redundancy.  This  is  the 
fraction  of  the  structure  of  the  message  which  is  determined  not 
by  the  free  choice  of  the  sender,  but  rather  by  the  accepted 
statistical  rules  governing  the  use  of  the  symbols  in  question.  It 
is  sensibly  called  redundancy,  for  this  fraction  of  the  message  is 
in  fact  redundant  in  something  close  to  the  ordinary  sense;  that 
is  to  say,  this  fraction  of  the  message  is  unnecessary  (and  hence 
repetitive  or  redundant)  in  the  sense  that  if  it  were  missing  the 
message  would  still  be  essentially  complete,  or  at  least  could  be 
completed. 

It  is  most  interesting  to  note  that  the  redundancy  of  English 
is  just  about  50  per  cent,4  so  that  about  half  of  the  letters  or 
words  we  choose  in  writing  or  speaking  are  under  our  free  choice, 
and  about  half  (although  we  are  not  ordinarily  aware  of  it)  are 
really  controlled  by  the  statistical  structure  of  the  language. 

4 The  50  per  cent  estimate  accounts  only  for  statistical  structure  out  to 
about  eight  letters,  so  that  the  ultimate  value  is  presumably  a little  higher. 


u 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


Apart  from  more  serious  implications,  which  again  we  will  post- 
pone to  our  final  discussion,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  a 
language  must  have  at  least  50  per  cent  of  real  freedom  (or 
relative  entropy)  in  the  choice  of  letters  if  one  is  to  be  able  to 
construct  satisfactory  crossword  puzzles.  If  it  has  complete  free- 
dom, then  every  array  of  letters  is  a crossword  puzzle.  If  it  has 
only  20  per  cent  of  freedom,  then  it  would  be  impossible  to  con- 
struct crossword  puzzles  in  such  complexity  and  number  as  would 
make  the  game  popular.  Shannon  has  estimated  that  if  the 
English  language  had  only  about  30  per  cent  redundancy,  then 
it  would  be  possible  to  construct  three-dimensional  crossword 
puzzles. 

Before  closing  this  section  on  information,  it  should  be  noted 
that  the  real  reason  that  Level  A analysis  deals  with  a concept  of 
information  which  characterizes  the  whole  statistical  nature  of 
the  information  source,  and  is  not  concerned  with  the  individual 
messages  (and  not  at  all  directly  concerned  with  the  meaning  of 
the  individual  messages)  is  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  engi- 
neering, a communication  system  must  face  the  problem  of 
handling  any  message  that  the  source  can  produce.  If  it  is  not 
possible  or  practicable  to  design  a system  which  can  handle 
everything  perfectly,  then  the  system  should  be  designed  to 
handle  well  the  jobs  it  is  most  likely  to  be  asked  to  do,  and 
should  resign  itself  to  be  less  efficient  for  the  rare  task.  This  sort 
of  consideration  leads  at  once  to  the  necessity  of  characterizing 
the  statistical  nature  of  the  whole  ensemble  of  messages  which 
a given  kind  of  source  can  and  will  produce.  And  information , 
as  used  in  communication  theory,  does  just  this. 

Although  it  is  not  at  all  the  purpose  of  this  paper  to  be  con- 
cerned with  mathematical  details,  it  nevertheless  seems  essential 
to  have  as  good  an  understanding  as  possible  of  the  entropy-like 
expression  which  measures  information.  If  one  is  concerned,  as 
in  a simple  case,  with  a set  of  n independent  symbols,  or  a set  of  n 
independent  complete  messages  for  that  matter,  whose  probabili- 
ties of  choice  are  px,  p2-  • • p„,  then  the  actual  expression  for 
the  information  is 

H = — [pi  log  Pi  4-  p2  log  p2  + * • • + Pn  log  Pn]  , 
or 

H = —Xpi  log  pi. 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




Where5  the  symbol  X indicates,  as  is  usual  in  mathematics,  that 
one  is  to  sum  all  terms  like  the  typical  one,  p%  log  pi,  written  as 
a defining  sample. 

This  looks  a little  complicated;  but  let  us  see  how  this  expres- 
sion behaves  in  some  simple  cases. 

Suppose  first  that  we  are  choosing  only  between  two  possible 
messages,  whose  probabilities  are  then  px  for  the  first  and  p2  = 1 
— pi  for  the  other.  If  one  reckons,  for  this  case,  the  numerical 
value  of  H,  it  turns  out  that  H has  its  largest  value,  namely 
one,  when  the  two  messages  are  equally  probable;  that  is  to  say 
when  pi  = p2  = \ ) that  is  to  say,  when  one  is  completely  free  to 
choose  between  the  two  messages.  Just  as  soon  as  one  message 
becomes  more  probable  than  the  other  (px  greater  than  p2,  say) , 
the  value  of  H decreases.  And  when  one  message  is  very  probable 
(px  almost  one  and  p2  almost  zero,  say),  the  value  of  H is  very 
small  (almost  zero) . 

In  the  limiting  case  where  one  probability  is  unity  (certainty) 
and  all  the  others  zero  (impossibility) , then  H is  zero  (no  uncer- 
tainty at  all  — no  freedom  of  choice  — no  information). 

Thus  H is  largest  when  the  two  probabilities  are  equal  (i.e., 
when  one  is  completely  free  and  unbiased  in  the  choice),  and 
reduces  to  zero  when  one’s  freedom  of  choice  is  gone. 

The  situation  just  described  is  in  fact  typical.  If  there  are 
many,  rather  than  two,  choices,  then  H is  largest  when  the  prob- 
abilities of  the  various  choices  are  as  nearly  equal  as  circum- 
stances permit  — when  one  has  as  much  freedom  as  possible  in 
making  a choice,  being  as  little  as  possible  driven  toward  some 
certain  choices  which  have  more  than  their  share  of  probability. 
Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  one  choice  has  a probability 
near  one  so  that  all  the  other  choices  have  probabilities  near 
zero.  This  is  clearly  a situation  in  which  one  is  heavily  influenced 
toward  one  particular  choice,  and  hence  has  little  freedom  of 
choice.  And  H in  such  a case  does  calculate  to  have  a very  small 
value  — the  information  (the  freedom  of  choice,  the  uncertainty) 
is  low. 

When  the  number  of  cases  is  fixed,  we  have  just  seen  that  then 

5 Do  not  worry  about  the  minus  sign.  Any  probability  is  a number  less 
than  or  equal  to  one,  and  the  logarithms  of  numbers  less  than  one  are 
themselves  negative.  Thus  the  minus  sign  is  necessary  in  order  that  H be 
in  fact  positive. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


the  information  is  the  greater,  the  more  nearly  equal  are  the 
probabilities  of  the  various  cases.  There  is  another  important  way 
of  increasing  H , namely  by  increasing  the  number  of  cases.  More 
accurately,  if  all  choices  are  equally  likely,  the  more  choices  there 
are,  the  larger  H will  be*.  There  is  more  “information”  if  you 
select  freely  out  of  a set  of  fifty  standard  messages,  than  if  you 
select  freely  out  of  a set  of  twenty- five. 

2.3.  Capacity  of  a Communication  Channel 

After  the  discussion  of  the  preceding  section,  one  is  not  surprised 
that  the  capacity  of  a channel  is  to  be  described  not  in  terms  of 
the  number  of  symbols  it  can  transmit,  but  rather  in  terms  of  the 
information  it  transmits.  Or  better,  since  this  last  phrase  lends 
itself  particularly  well  to  a misinterpretation  of  the  word  infor- 
mation, the  capacity  of  a channel  is  to  be  described  in  terms  of 
its  ability  to  transmit  what  is  produced  out  of  source  of  a given 
information. 

If  the  source  is  of  a simple  sort  in  which  all  symbols  are  of  the 
same  time  duration  (which  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  tele- 
type), if  the  source  is  such  that  each  symbol  chosen  represents 
s bits  of  information  (being  freely  chosen  from  among  2s  sym- 
bols) , and  if  the  channel  can  transmit,  say  h symbols  per  second, 
then  the  capacity  of  C of  the  channel  is  defined  to  be  ns  bits  per 
second. 

In  a more  general  case,  one  has  to  take  account  of  the  varying 
lengths  of  the  various  symbols.  Thus  the  general  expression  for 
capacity  of  a channel  involves  the  logarithm  of  the  numbers  of 
symbols  of  certain  time  duration  (which  introduces,  of  course, 
the  idea  of  information  and  corresponds  to  the  factor  s in  the 
simple  case  of  the  preceding  paragraph) ; and  also  involves 
the  number  of  such  symbols  handled  (which  corresponds  to  the 
factor  n of  the  preceding  paragraph).  Thus  in  the  general  case, 
capacity  measures  not  the  number  of  symbols  transmitted  per 
second,  but  rather  the  amount  of  information  transmitted  per 
second,  using  bits  per  second  as  its  unit. 

2.4.  Coding 

At  the  outset  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  transmitter  accepts  the 
message  and  turns  it  into  something  called  the  signal,  the  latter 
being  what  actually  passes  over  the  channel  to  the  receiver. 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




The  transmitter,  in  such  a case  as  telephony,  merely  changes 
the  audible  voice  signal  over  into  something  (the  varying  elec- 
trical current  on  the  telephone  wire)  which  is  at  once  clearly 
different  but  clearly  equivalent.  But  the  transmitter  may  carry 
out  a much  more  complex  operation  on  the  message  to  produce 
the  signal.  It  could,  for  example,  take  a written  message  and  use 
some  code  to  encipher  this  message  into,  say  a sequence  of 
numbers;  these  numbers  then  being  sent  over  the  channel  as  the 
signal. 

Thus  one  says,  in  general,  that  the  function  of  the  transmitter 
is  to  encode , and  that  of  the  receiver  to  decode,  the  message.  The 
theory  provides  for  very  sophisticated  transmitters  and  receivers 
— such,  for  example,  as  possess  “memories,”  so  that  the  way 
they  encode  a certain  symbol  of  the  message  depends  not  only 
upon  this  one  symbol,  but  also  upon  previous  symbols  of  the 
message  and  the  way  they  have  been  encoded. 

We  are  now  in  a position  to  state  the  fundamental  theorem, 
produced  in  this  theory,  for  a noiseless  channel  transmitting 
discrete  symbols.  This  theorem  relates  to  a communication  chan- 
nel which  has  a capacity  of  C bits  per  second,  accepting  signals 
from  a source  of  entropy  (or  information)  of  H bits  per  second. 
The  theorem  states  that  by  devising  proper  coding  procedures 
for  the  transmitter  it  is  possible  to  transmit  symbols  over  the 
channel  at  an  average  rate6  which  is  nearly  C/H,  but  which,  no 
matter  how  clever  the  coding,  can  never  be  made  to  exceed  C/H. 

The  significance  of  this  theorem  is  to  be  discussed  more  use- 
fully a little  later,  when  we  have  the  more  general  case  when 
noise  is  present.  For  the  moment,  though,  it  is  important  to  notice 
the  critical  role  which  coding  plays. 

Remember  that  the  entropy  (or  information)  associated  with 
the  process  which  generates  messages  or  signals  is  determined  by 
the  statistical  character  of  the  process  — by  the  various  prob- 
abilities for  arriving  at  message  situations  and  for  choosing,  when 
in  those  situations  the  next  symbols.  The  statistical  nature  of 
messages  is  entirely  determined  by  the  character  of  the  source. 

8 We  remember  that  the  capacity  C involves  the  idea  of  information  trans- 
mitted per  second,  and  is  thus  measured  in  bits  per  second.  The  entropy  H 
here  measures  information  per  symbol,  so  that  the  ratio  of  C to  H measures 
symbols  per  second. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


But  the  statistical  character  of  the  signal  as  actually  transmitted 
by  a channel,  and  hence  the  entropy  in  the  channel,  is  deter- 
mined both  by  what  one  attempts  to  feed  into  the  channel  and 
by  the  capabilities  of  the  channel  to  handle  different  signal 
situations.  For  example,  in  telegraphy,  there  have  to  be  spaces 
between  dots  and  dots,  between  dots  and  dashes,  and  between 
dashes  and  dashes,  or  the  dots  and  dashes  would  not  be  recog- 
nizable. 

Now  it  turns  out  that  when  a channel  does  have  certain  con- 
straints of  this  sort,  which  limit  complete  signal  freedom,  there 
are  certain  statistical  signal  characteristics  which  lead  to  a signal 
entropy  which  is  larger  than  it  would  be  for  any  other  statistical 
signal  structure,  and  in  this  important  case,  the  signal  entropy 
is  exactly  equal  to  the  channel  capacity. 

In  terms  of  these  ideas,  it  is  now  possible  precisely  to  char- 
acterize the  most  efficient  kind  of  coding.  The  best  transmitter, 
in  fact,  is  that  which  codes  the  message  in  such  a way  that  the 
signal  has  just  those  optimum  statistical  characteristics  which 
are  best  suited  to  the  channel  to  be  used  — which  in  fact  maxi- 
mize the  signal  (or  one  may  say,  the  channel)  entropy  and  make 
it  equal  to  the  capacity  C of  the  channel. 

This  kind  of  coding  leads,  by  the  fundamental  theorem  above, 
to  the  maximum  rate  C/H  for  the  transmission  of  symbols.  But 
for  this  gain  in  transmission  rate,  one  pays  a price.  For  rather 
perversely  it  happens  that  as  one  makes  the  coding  more  and 
more  nearly  ideal,  one  is  forced  to  longer  and  longer  delays  in 
the  process  of  coding.  Part  of  this  dilemma  is  met  by  the  fact  that 
in  electronic  equipment  “long”  may  mean  an  exceedingly  small 
fraction  of  a second,  and  part  by  the  fact  that  one  makes  a 
compromise,  balancing  the  gain  in  transmission  rate  against  loss 
of  coding  time. 

2.5.  Noise 

How  does  noise  affect  information?  Information  is,  we  must 
steadily  remember,  a measure  of  one’s  freedom  of  choice  in  select- 
ing a message.  The  greater  this  freedom  of  choice,  and  hence  the 
greater  the  information,  the  greater  is  the  uncertainty  that  the 
message  actually  selected  is  some  particular  one.  Thus  greater 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




freedom  of  choice,  greater  uncertainty,  greater  information  go 
hand  in  hand. 

If  noise  is  introduced,  then  the  received  message  contains 
certain  distortions,  certain  errors,  certain  extraneous  material, 
that  would  certainly  lead  one  to  say  that  the  received  message 
exhibits,  because  of  the  effects  of  the  noise,  an  increased  uncer- 
tainty. But  if  the  uncertainty  is  increased,  the  information  is 
increased,  and  this  sounds  as  though  the  noise  were  beneficial! 

It  is  generally  true  that  when  there  is  noise,  the  received  signal 
exhibits  greater  information  — or  better,  the  received  signal  is 
selected  out  of  a more  varied  set  than  is  the  transmitted  signal. 
This  is  a situation  which  beautifully  illustrates  the  semantic  trap 
into  which  one  can  fall  if  he  does  not  remember  that  “informa- 
tion” is  used  here  with  a special  meaning  that  measures  freedom 
of  choice  and  hence  uncertainty  as  to  what  choice  has  been  made. 
It  is  therefore  possible  for  the  word  information  to  have  either 
good  or  bad  connotations.  Uncertainty  which  arises  by  virtue  of 
freedom  of  choice  on  the  part  of  the  sender  is  desirable  uncer- 
tainty. Uncertainty  which  arises  because  of  errors  or  because  of 
the  influence  of  noise  is  undesirable  uncertainty. 

It  is  thus  clear  where  the  joker  is  in  saying  that  the  received 
signal  has  more  information.  Some  of  this  information  is  spurious 
and  undesirable  and  has  been  introduced  via  the  noise.  To  get 
the  useful  information  in  the  received  signal  we  must  subtract 
out  this  spurious  portion. 

Before  we  can  clear  up  this  point  we  have  to  stop  for  a little 
detour.  Suppose  one  has  two  sets  of  symbols,  such  as  the  message 
symbols  generated  by  the  information  source,  and  the  signal 
symbols  which  are  actually  received.  The  probabilities  of  these 
two  sets  of  symbols  are  interrelated,  for  clearly  the  probability 
of  receiving  a certain  symbol  depends  upon  what  symbol  was 
sent.  With  no  errors  from  noise  or  from  other  causes,  the  received 
signals  would  correspond  precisely  to  the  message  symbols  sent; 
and  in  the  presence  of  possible  error,  the  probabilities  for  received 
symbols  would  obviously  be  loaded  heavily  on  those  which  cor- 
respond, or  closely  correspond,  to  the  message  symbols  sent. 

Now  in  such  a situation  one  can  calculate  what  is  called  the 
entropy  of  one  set  of  symbols  relative  to  the  other.  Let  us,  for 
example,  consider  the  entropy  of  the  message  relative  to  the 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


signal.  It  is  unfortunate  that  we  cannot  understand  the  issues 
involved  here  without  going  into  some  detail.  Suppose  for  the 
moment  that  one  knows  that  a certain  signal  symbol  has  actually 
been  received.  Then  each  message  symbol  takes  on  a certain 
probability  — relatively  large  for  the  symbol  identical  with  or  the 
symbols  similar  to  the  one  received,  and  relatively  small  for  all 
others.  Using  this  set  of  probabilities,  one  calculates  a tentative 
entropy  value.  This  is  the  message  entropy  on  the  assumption 
of  a definite  known  received  or  signal  symbol.  Under  any  good 
conditions  its  value  is  low,  since  the  probabilities  involved  are 
not  spread  abound  rather  evenly  on  the  various  cases,  but  are 
heavily  loaded  on  one  or  a few  cases.  Its  value  would  be  zero 
(see  page  13)  in  any  case  where  noise  was  completely  absent, 
for  then,  the  signal  symbol  being  known,  all  message  probabilities 
would  be  zero  except  for  one  symbol  (namely  the  one  received), 
which  would  have  a probability  of  unity. 

For  each  assumption  as  to  the  signal  symbol  received,  one  can 
calculate  one  of  these  tentative  message  entropies.  Calculate  all 
of  them,  and  then  average  them,  weighting  each  one  in  accordance 
with  the  probability  of  the  signal  symbol  assumed  in  calculating 
it.  Entropies  calculated  in  this  way,  when  there  are  two  sets  of 
symbols  to  consider,  are  called  relative  entropies.  The  particular 
one  just  described  is  the  entropy  of  the  message  relative  to  the 
signal,  and  Shannon  has  named  this  also  the  equivocation. 

From  the  way  this  equivocation  is  calculated,  we  can  see  what 
its  significance  is.  It  measures  the  average  uncertainty  in  the 
message  when  the  signal  is  known.  If  there  were  no  noise,  then 
there  would  be  no  uncertainty  concerning  the  message  if  the 
signal  is  known.  If  the  information  source  has  any  residual 
uncertainty  after  the  signal  is  known,  then  this  must  be  unde- 
sirable uncertainty  due  to  noise. 

The  discussion  of  the  last  few  paragraphs  centers  around  the 
quantity  “the  average  uncertainty  in  the  message  source  when  the 
received  signal  is  known.”  It  can  equally  well  be  phrased  in  terms 
of  the  similar  quantity  “the  average  uncertainty  concerning  the 
received  signal  when  the  message  sent  is  known.”  This  latter 
uncertainty  would,  of  course,  also  be  zero  if  there  were  no  noise. 

As  to  the  interrelationship  of  these  quantities,  it  is  easy  to 
prove  that 

H(x)  — Hy{x)  = H(y)  — Hx(y ) 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 


where  H(x)  is  the  entropy  or  information  of  the  source  of  mes- 
sages; H{y)  the  entropy  or  information  of  received  signals; 
Hy{x ) the  equivocation,  or  the  uncertainty  in  the  message  source 
if  the  signal  be  known;  Hx(y ) the  uncertainty  in  the  received 
signals  if  the  messages  sent  be  known,  or  the  spurious  part  of  the 
received  signal  information  which  is  due  to  noise.  The  right  side 
of  this  equation  is  the  useful  information  which  is  transmitted  in 
spite  of  the  bad  effect  of  the  noise. 

It  is  now  possible  to  explain  what  one  means  by  the  capacity 
C of  a noisy  channel.  It  is,  in  fact,  defined  to  be  equal  to  the 
maximum  rate  (in  bits  per  second)  at  which  useful  information 
(i.e.,  total  uncertainty  minus  noise  uncertainty)  can  be  trans- 
mitted over  the  channel. 

Why  does  one  speak,  here,  of  a “maximum”  rate?  What  can 
one  do,  that  is,  to  make  this  rate  larger  or  smaller?  The  answer 
is  that  one  can  affect  this  rate  by  choosing  a source  whose 
statistical  characteristics  are  suitably  related  to  the  restraints 
imposed  by  the  nature  of  the  channel.  That  is,  one  can  maximize 
the  rate  of  transmitting  useful  information  by  using  proper  coding 
(see  pages  16-17) . 

And  now,  finally,  let  us  consider  the  fundamental  theorem  for 
a noisy  channel.  Suppose  that  this  noisy  channel  has,  in  the  sense 
just  described,  a capacity  C,  suppose  it  is  accepting  from  an 
information  source  characterized  by  an  entropy  of  H (x)  bits 
per  second,  the  entropy  of  the  received  signals  being  H ( y ) bits 
per  second.  If  the  channel  capacity  C is  equal  to  or  larger  than 
H(x),  then  by  devising  appropriate  coding  systems,  the  output 
of  the  source  can  be  transmitted  over  the  channel  with  as  little 
error  as  one  pleases.  However  small  a frequency  of  error  you 
specify,  there  is  a code  which  meets  the  demand.  But  if  the 
channel  capacity  C is  less  than  H (x) , the  entropy  of  the  source 
from  which  it  accepts  messages,  then  it  is  impossible  to  devise 
codes  which  reduce  the  error  frequency  as  low  as  one  may  please. 

However  clever  one  is  with  the  coding  process,  it  will  always 
be  true  that  after  the  signal  is  received  there  remains  some  un- 
desirable (noise)  uncertainty  about  what  the  message  was;  and 
this  undesirable  uncertainty  — this  equivocation  — will  always 
be  equal  to  or  greater  than  H(x)  — C.  Furthermore,  there  is 
always  at  least  one  code  which  is  capable  of  reducing  this 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


undesirable  uncertainty,  concerning  the  message,  down  to  a value 
which  exceeds  H{x)  — C by  an  arbitrarily  small  amount. 

The  most  important  aspect,  of  course,  is  that  the  minimum 
undesirable  or  spurious  uncertainties  cannot  be  reduced  further, 
no  matter  how  complicated  or  appropriate  the  coding  process. 
This  powerful  theorem  gives  a precise  and  almost  startlingly 
simple  description  of  the  utmost  dependability  one  can  ever 
obtain  from  a communication  channel  which  operates  in  the 
presence  of  noise. 

One  practical  consequence,  pointed  out  by  Shannon,  should  be 
noted.  Since  English  is  about  50  per  cent  redundant,  it  would 
be  possible  to  save  about  one-half  the  time  of  ordinary  telegraphy 
by  a proper  encoding  process,  provided  one  were  going  to  transmit 
over  a noiseless  channel.  When  there  is  noise  on  a channel,  how- 
ever, there  is  some  real  advantage  in  not  using  a coding  process 
that  eliminates  all  of  the  redundancy.  For  the  remaining  redun- 
dancy helps  combat  the  noise.  This  is  very  easy  to  see,  for  just 
because  of  the  fact  that  the  redundancy  of  English  is  high,  one 
has,  for  example,  little  or  no  hesitation  about  correcting  errors  in 
spelling  that  have  arisen  during  transmission. 

2.6.  Continuous  Messages 

Up  to  this  point  we  have  been  concerned  with  messages  formed 
out  of  discrete  symbols,  as  words  are  formed  of  letters,  sentences 
of  words,  a melody  of  notes,  or  a halftone  picture  of  a finite 
number  of  discrete  spots.  What  happens  to  the  theory  if  one 
considers  continuous  messages,  such  as  the  speaking  voice  with  its 
continuous  variation  of  pitch  and  energy? 

Very  roughly  one  may  say  that  the  extended  theory  is  some- 
what more  difficult  and  complicated  mathematically,  but  not 
essentially  different.  Many  of  the  above  statements  for  the 
discrete  case  require  no  modification,  and  others  require  only 
minor  change. 

One  circumstance  which  helps  a good  deal  is  the  following.  As 
a practical  matter,  one  is  always  interested  in  a continuous 
signal  which  is  built  up  of  simple  harmonic  constituents  of  not  all 
frequencies , but  rather  of  frequencies  which  lie  wholly  within 
a band  from  zero  frequency  to,  say,  a frequency  of  W cycles  per 
second.  Thus  although  the  human  voice  does  contain  higher  fre- 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 


2S 


quencies,  very  satisfactory  communication  can  be  achieved  over 
a telephone  channel  that  handles  frequencies  only  up  to,  say  four 
thousand.  With  frequencies  up  to  ten  or  twelve  thousand,  high 
fidelity  radio  transmission  of  symphonic  music  is  possible,  etc. 

There  is  a very  convenient  mathematical  theorem  which  states 
that  a continuous  signal,  T seconds  in  duration  and  band-limited 
in  frequency  to  the  range  from  0 to  W,  can  be  completely  speci- 
fied, by  stating  2 TW  numbers.  This  is  really  a remarkable 
theorem.  Ordinarily  a continuous  curve  can  be  only  approxi- 
mately characterized  by  stating  any  finite  number  of  points 
through  which  it  passes,  and  an  infinite  number  would  in  general 
be  required  for  complete  information  about  the  curve.  But  if  the 
curve  is  built  up  out  of  simple  harmonic  constituents  of  a limited 
number  of  frequencies,  as  a complex  sound  is  built  up  out  of  a 
limited  number  of  pure  tones,  then  a finite  number  of  parameters 
is  all  that  is  necessary.  This  has  the  powerful  advantage  of 
reducing  the  character  of  the  communication  problem  for  con- 
tinuous signals  from  a complicated  situation  where  one  would 
have  to  deal  with  an  infinite  number  of  variables  to  a consider- 
ably simpler  situation  where  one  deals  with  a finite  (though 
large)  number  of  variables. 

In  the  theory  for  the  continuous  case  there  are  developed 
formulas  which  describe  the  maximum  capacity  C of  a channel  of 
frequency  bandwidth  W , when  the  average  power  used  in  trans- 
mitting is  P,  the  channel  being  subject  to  a noise  of  power  N, 
this  noise  being  “white  thermal  noise”  of  a special  kind  which 
Shannon  defines.  This  white  thermal  noise  is  itself  band  limited 
in  frequency,  and  the  amplitudes  of  the  various  frequency  con- 
stituents are  subject  to  a normal  (Gaussian)  probability  distri- 
bution. Under  these  circumstances,  Shannon  obtains  the  theorem, 
again  really  quite  remarkable  in  its  simplicity  and  its  scope, 
that  it  is  possible,  by  the  best  coding,  to  transmit  binary  digits  at 
the  rate  of 


W log2 


P + N 
N 


bits  per  second  and  have  an  arbitrarily  low  frequency  of  error. 
But  this  rate  cannot  possibly  be  exceeded,  no  matter  how  clever 
the  coding,  without  giving  rise  to  a definite  frequency  of  errors. 
For  the  case  of  arbitrary  noise,  rather  than  the  special  “white 


H 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


thermal”  noise  assumed  above,  Shannon  does  not  succeed  in 
deriving  one  explicit  formula  for  channel  capacity,  but  does  ob- 
tain useful  upper  and  lower  limits  for  channel  capacity.  And  he 
also  derives  limits  for  channel  capacity  when  one  specifies  not 
the  average  power  of  the  transmitter,  but  rather  the  peak 
instantaneous  power. 

Finally  it  should  be  stated  that  Shannon  obtains  results  which 
are  necessarily  somewhat  less  specific,  but  which  are  of  obviously 
deep  and  sweeping  significance,  which,  for  a general  sort  of  con- 
tinuous message  or  signal,  characterize  the  fidelity  of  the  received 
message,  and  the  concepts  of  rate  at  which  a source  generates 
information,  rate  of  transmission,  and  channel  capacity,  all  of 
these  being  relative  to  certain  fidelity  requirements. 


The  Interrelationship  of  the  Three  Levels 
of  Communication  Problems 


3.1.  Introductory 

In  the  first  section  of  this  paper  it  was  suggested  that  there  are 
three  levels  at  which  one  may  consider  the  general  communication 
problem.  Namely,  one  may  ask: 

Level  A.  How  accurately  can  the  symbols  of  communication  be 
transmitted? 

Level  B.  How  precisely  do  the  transmitted  symbols  convey  the 
desired  meaning? 

Level  C.  How  effectively  does  the  received  meaning  affect  con- 
duct in  the  desired  way  ? 

It  was  suggested  that  the  mathematical  theory  of  communica- 
tion, as  developed  by  Shannon,  Wiener,  and  others,  and  particu- 
larly the  more  definitely  engineering  theory  treated  by  Shannon, 
although  ostensibly  applicable  only  to  Level  A problems,  actu- 
ally is  helpful  and  suggestive  for  the  level  B and  C problems. 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




We  then  took  a look,  in  section  2,  at  what  this  mathematical 
theory  is,  what  concepts  it  develops,  what  results  it  has  obtained. 
It  is  the  purpose  of  this  concluding  section  to  review  the  situa- 
tion, and  see  to  what  extent  and  in  what  terms  the  original 
section  was  justified  in  indicating  that  the  progress  made  at  Level 
A is  capable  of  contributing  to  levels  B and  C,  was  justified  in 
indicating  that  the  interrelation  of  the  three  levels  is  so  con- 
siderable that  one’s  final  conclusion  may  be  that  the  separation 
into  the  three  levels  is  really  artificial  and  undesirable. 

3.2.  Generality  of  the  Theofy  at  Level  A 

The  obvious  first  remark,  and  indeed  the  remark  that  carries  the 
major  burden  of  the  argument,  is  that  the  mathematical  theory 
is  exceedingly  general  in  its  scope,  fundamental  in  the  problems 
it  treats,  and  of  classic  simplicity  and  power  in  the  results  it 
reaches. 

This  is  a theory  so  general  that  one  does  not  need  to  say  what 
kinds  of  symbols  are  being  considered  — whether  written  letters 
or  words,  or  musical  notes,  or  spoken  words,  or  symphonic  music, 
or  pictures.  The  theory  is  deep  enough  so  that  the  relationships  it 
reveals  indiscriminately  apply  to  all  these  and  to  other  forms  of 
communication.  This  means,  of  course,  that  the  theory  is  suffi- 
ciently imaginatively  motivated  so  that  it  is  dealing  with  the 
real  inner  core  of  the  communication  problem  — with  those  basic 
relationships  which  hold  in  general,  no  matter  what  special  form 
the  actual  case  may  take. 

It  is  an  evidence  of  this  generality  that  the  theory  contributes 
importantly  to,  and  in  fact  is  really  the  basic  theory  of  cryptog- 
raphy which  is,  of  course,  a form  of  coding.  In  a similar  way, 
the  theory  contributes  to  the  problem  of  translation  from  one 
language  to  another,  although  the  complete  story  here  clearly 
requires  consideration  of  meaning,  as  well  as  of  information. 
Similarly,  the  ideas  developed  in  this  work  connect  so  closely 
with  the  problem  of  the  logical  design  of  great  computers  that 
it  is  no  surprise  that  Shannon  has  just  written  a paper  on  the 
design  of  a computer  which  would  be  capable  of  playing  a 
skillful  game  of  chess.  And  it  is  of  further  direct  pertinence  to 
the  present  contention  that  this  paper  closes  with  the  remark 
that  either  one  must  say  that  such  a computer  “thinks,”  or  one 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


must  substantially  modify  the  conventional  implication  of  the 
verb  “to  think.” 

As  a second  point,  it  seems  clear  that  an  important  contribu- 
tion has  been  made  to  any  possible  general  theory  of  communica- 
tion by  the  formalization  on  which  the  present  theory  is  based. 
It  seems  at  first  obvious  to  diagram  a communication  system  as 
it  is  done  at  the  outset  of  this  theory;  but  this  breakdown  of  the 
situation  must  be  very  deeply  sensible  and  appropriate,  as  one 
becomes  convinced  when  he  sees  how  smoothly  and  generally  this 
viewpoint  leads  to  central  issues.  It  is  almost  certainly  true  that 
a consideration  of  communication  on  levels  B and  C will  require 
additions  to  the  schematic  diagram  on  page  7,  but  it  seems 
equally  likely  that  what  is  required  are  minor  additions,  and  no 
real  revision. 

Thus  when  one  moves  to  levels  B and  C,  it  may  prove  to  be 
essential  to  take  account  of  the  statistical  characteristics  of  the 
destination.  One  can  imagine,  as  an  addition  to  the  diagram, 
another  box  labeled  “Semantic  Receiver”  interposed  between  the 
engineering  receiver  (which  changes  signals  to  messages)  and  the 
destination.  This  semantic  receiver  subjects  the  message  to  a 
second  decoding,  the  demand  on  this  one  being  that  it  must 
match  the  statistical  semantic  characteristics  of  the  message  to 
the  statistical  semantic  capacities  of  the  totality  of  receivers,  or 
of  that  subset  of  receivers  which  constitute  the  audience  one 
wishes  to  affect. 

Similarly  one  can  imagine  another  box  in  the  diagram  which, 
inserted  between  the  information  source  and  the  transmitter, 
would  be  labeled  “semantic  noise,”  the  box  previously  labeled  as 
simply  “noise”  now  being  labeled  “engineering  noise.”  From  this 
source  is  imposed  into  the  signal  the  perturbations  or  distortions 
of  meaning  which  are  not  intended  by  the  source  but  which 
inescapably  affect  the  destination.  And  the  problem  of  semantic 
decoding  must  take  this  semantic  noise  into  account.  It  is  also 
possible  to  think  of  an  adjustment  of  original  message  so  that  the 
sum  of  message  meaning  plus  semantic  noise  is  equal  to  the 
desired  total  message  meaning  at  the  destination. 

Thirdly,  it  seems  highly  suggestive  for  the  problem  at  all  levels 
that  error  and  confusion  arise  and  fidelity  decreases,  when,  no 
matter  how  good  the  coding,  one  tries  to  crowd  too  much  over  a 


Some  Recent  Contributions:  Weaver 




channel  (i.e.,  H > C).  Here  again  a general  theory  at  all  levels 
will  surely  have  to  take  into  account  not  only  the  capacity  of  the 
channel  but  also  (even  the  words  are  right!)  the  capacity  of  the 
audience.  If  one  tries  to  overcrowd  the  capacity  of  the  audience, 
it  is  probably  true,  by  direct  analogy,  that  you  do  not,  so  to 
speak,  fill  the  audience  up  and  then  waste  only  the  remainder  by 
spilling.  More  likely,  and  again  by  direct  analogy,  if  you  over- 
crowd the  capacity  of  the  audience  you  force  a general  and 
inescapable  error  and  confusion. 

Fourthly,  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  levels  B and  C do  not  have 

/ 

much  to  learn  from,  and  do  not  have  the  approach  to  their 
problems  usefully  oriented  by,  the  development  in  this  theory 
of  the  entropic  ideas  in  relation  to  the  concept  of  information. 

The  concept  of  information  developed  in  this  theory  at  first 
seems  disappointing  and  bizarre  — disappointing  because  it  has 
nothing  to  do  with  meaning,  and  bizarre  because  it  deals  not 
with  a single  message  but  rather  with  the  statistical  character  of 
a whole  ensemble  of  messages,  bizarre  also  because  in  these  sta- 
tistical terms  the  two  words  information  and  uncertainty  find 
themselves  to  be  partners. 

I think,  however,  that  these  should  be  only  temporary  reac- 
tions; and  that  one  should  say,  at  the  end,  that  this  analysis  has 
so  penetratingly  cleared  the  air  that  one  is  now,  perhaps  for  the 
first  time,  ready  for  a real  theory  of  meaning.  An  engineering 
communication  theory  is  just  like  a very  proper  and  discreet  girl 
accepting  your  telegram.  She  pays  no  attention  to  the  meaning, 
whether  it  be  sad,  or  joyous,  or  embarrassing.  But  she  must  be 
prepared  to  deal  with  all  that  come  to  her  desk.  This  idea  that  a 
communication  system  ought  to  try  to  deal  with  all  possible 
messages,  and  that  the  intelligent  way  to  try  is  to  base  design  on 
the  statistical  character  of  the  source,  is  surely  not  without 
significance  for  communication  in  general.  Language  must  be 
designed  (or  developed)  with  a view  to  the  totality  of  things  that 
man  may  wish  to  say;  but  not  being  able  to  accomplish  every- 
thing, it  too  should  do  as  well  as  possible  as  often  as  possible. 
That  is  to  say,  it  too  should  deal  with  its  task  statistically. 

The  concept  of  the  information  to  be  associated  with  a source 
leads  directly,  as  we  have  seen,  to  a study  of  the  statistical  struc- 
ture of  language;  and  this  study  reveals  about  the  English  lan- 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


guage,  as  an  example,  information  which  seems  surely  significant 
to  students  of  every  phase  of  language  and  communication.  The 
idea  of  utilizing  the  powerful  body  of  theory  concerning  Markoff 
processes  seems  particularly  promising  for  semantic  studies,  since 
this  theory  is  specifically  adapted  to  handle  one  of  the  most  sig- 
nificant but  difficult  aspects  of  meaning,  namely  the  influence  of 
context.  One  has  the  vague  feeling  that  information  and  meaning 
may  prove  to  be  something  like  a pair  of  canonically  conjugate 
variables  in  quantum  theory,  they  being  subject  to  some  joint 
restriction  that  condemns  a person  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  one  as 
he  insists  on  having  much  of  the  other. 

Or  perhaps  meaning  may  be  shown  to  be  analogous  to  one  of 
the  quantities  on  which  the  entropy  of  a thermodynamic  ensemble 
depends.  The  appearance  of  entropy  in  the  theory,  as  was  re- 
marked earlier,  is  surely  most  interesting  and  significant.  Edding- 
ton has  already  been  quoted  in  this  connection,  but  there  is 
another  passage  in  “The  Nature  of  the  Physical  World”  which 
seems  particularly  apt  and  suggestive: 

Suppose  that  we  were  asked  to  arrange  the  following  in  two  cate- 
gories — distance,  mass,  electric  force,  entropy,  beauty,  melody. 

I think  there  are  the  strongest  grounds  for  placing  entropy  along- 
side beauty  and  melody,  and  not  with  the  first  three.  Entropy  is  only 
found  when  the  parts  are  viewed  in  association,  and  it  is  by  viewing 
or  hearing  the  parts  in  association  that  beauty  and  melody  are  dis- 
cerned. All  three  are  features  of  arrangement.  It  is  a pregnant 
thought  that  one  of  these  three  associates  should  be  able  to  figure  as 
a commonplace  quantity  of  science.  The  reason  why  this  stranger 
can  pass  itself  off  among  the  aborigines  of  the  physical  world  is  that 
it  is  able  to  speak  their  language,  viz.,  the  language  of  arithmetic. 

I feel  sure  that  Eddington  would  have  been  willing  to  include 
the  word  meaning  along  with  beauty  and  melody;  and  I suspect 
he  would  have  been  thrilled  to  see,  in  this  theory,  that  entropy 
not  only  speaks  the  language  of  arithmetic;  it  also  speaks  the 
language  of  language. 


THE  MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  COMMUNICATION 


By  Claude  E.  Shannon 


Introduction 


The  recent  development  of  various  methods  of  modulation  such 
as  PCM  and  PPM  which  exchange  bandwidth  for  signal-to-noise 
ratio  has  intensified  the  interest  in  a general  theory  of  communi- 
cation. A basis  for  such  a theory  is  contained  in  the  important 
papers  of  Nyquist1  and  Hartley2  on  this  subject.  In  the  present 
paper  we  will  extend  the  theory  to  include  a number  of  new 
factors,  in  particular  the  effect  of  noise  in  the  channel,  and  the 
savings  possible  due  to  the  statistical  structure  of  the  original 
message  and  due  to  the  nature  of  the  final  destination  of  the 
information. 

The  fundamental  problem  of  communication  is  that  of  repro- 
ducing at  one  point  either  exactly  or  approximately  a message 
selected  at  another  point.  Frequently  the  messages  have  meaning; 
that  is  they  refer  to  or  are  correlated  according  to  some  system 
with  certain  physical  or  conceptual  entities.  These  semantic 
aspects  of  communication  are  irrelevant  to  the  engineering  prob- 
lem. The  significant  aspect  is  that  the  actual  message  is  one 
selected  jrom  a set  of  possible  messages.  The  system  must  be 
designed  to  operate  for  each  possible  selection,  not  just  the  one 
which  will  actually  be  chosen  since  this  is  unknown  at  the  time 
of  design. 

1 Nyquist,  H.,  “Certain  Factors  Affecting  Telegraph  Speed,”  Bell  System 
Technical  Journal,  April  1924,  p.  324;  “Certain  Topics  in  Telegraph  Trans- 
mission Theory,”  A.I.K.E.  Trans.,  v.  47,  April  1928,  p.  617. 

2 Hartley,  R.  V.  L.,  “Transmission  of  Information,”  Bell  System  Technical 
Journal,  July  1928,  p.  535. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


If  the  number  of  messages  in  the  set  is  finite  then  this  number 
or  any  monotonic  function  of  this  number  can  be  regarded  as  a 
measure  of  the  information  produced  when  one  message  is  chosen 
from  the  set,  all  choices  being  equally  likely.  As  was  pointed  out 
by  Hartley  the  most  natural  choice  is  the  logarithmic  function. 
Although  this  definition  must  be  generalized  considerably  when 
we  consider  the  influence  of  the  statistics  of  the  message  and 
when  we  have  a continuous  range  of  messages,  we  will  in  all 
cases  use  an  essentially  logarithmic  measure. 

The  logarithmic  measure  is  more  convenient  for  various 
reasons: 

1.  It  is  practically  more  useful.  Parameters  of  engineering 
importance  such  as  time,  bandwidth,  number  of  relays,  etc.,  tend 
to  vary  linearly  with  the  logarithm  of  the  number  of  possibilities. 
For  example,  adding  one  relay  to  a group  doubles  the  number  of 
possible  states  of  the  relays.  It  adds  1 to  the  base  2 logarithm 
of  this  number.  Doubling  the  time  roughly  squares  the  number  of 
possible  messages,  or  doubles  the  logarithm,  etc. 

2.  It  is  nearer  to  our  intuitive  feeling  as  to  the  proper  measure. 
This  is  closely  related  to  (1)  since  we  intuitively  measure 
entities  by  linear  comparison  with  common  standards.  One  feels, 
for  example,  that  two  punched  cards  should  have  twice  the 
capacity  of  one  for  information  storage,  and  two  identical  chan- 
nels twice  the  capacity  of  one  for  transmitting  information. 

3.  It  is  mathematically  more  suitable.  Many  of  the  limiting 
operations  are  simple  in  terms  of  the  logarithm  but  would  require 
clumsy  restatement  in  terms  of  the  number  of  possibilities. 

The  choice  of  a logarithmic  base  corresponds  to  the  choice  of 
a unit  for  measuring  information.  If  the  base  2 is  used  the 
resulting  units  may  be  called  binary  digits,  or  more  briefly  hits,  a 
word  suggested  by  J.  W.  Tukey.  A device  with  two  stable  posi- 
tions, such  as  a relay  or  a flip-flop  circuit,  can  store  one  bit  of 
information.  N such  devices  can  store  N bits,  since  the  total 
number  of  possible  states  is  2N  and  log2  2N  = N.  If  the  base  10  is 
used  the  units  may  be  called 'decimal  digits.  Since 

log2  M = log10  M/ log10  2 
3.32  logio  M , 


Introduction 




a decimal  digit  is  about  bits.  A digit  wheel  on  a desk  com- 
puting machine  has  ten  stable  positions  and  therefore  has  a 
storage  capacity  of  one  decimal  digit.  In  analytical  work  where 
integration  and  differentiation  are  involved  the  base  e is  some- 
times useful.  The  resulting  units  of  information  will  be  called 
natural  units.  Change  from  the  base  a to  base  b merely  requires 
multiplication  by  log*,  a. 

By  a communication  system  we  will  mean  a system  of  the 
type  indicated  schematically  in  Fig.  1.  It  consists  of  essentially 
five  parts: 

1.  An  information  source  which  produces  a message  or  sequence 
of  messages  to  be  communicated  to  the  receiving  terminal.  The 
message  may  be  of  various  types:  (a)  A sequence  of  letters  as 
in  a telegraph  or  teletype  system;  (b)  A single  function  of  time 
f(t)  as  in  radio  or  telephony;  (c)  A function  of  time  and  other 
variables  as  in  black  and  white  television  — here  the  message 
may  be  thought  of  as  a function  / ( x , y,  t)  of  two  space  coordi- 
nates and  time,  the  light  intensity  at  point  (x,  y)  and  time  t on  a 
pickup  tube  plate;  (d)  Two  or  more  functions  of  time,  say 
fit),  git),  hit)  — this  is  the  case  in  “three-dimensional”  sound 
transmission  or  if  the  system  is  intended  to  service  several  indi- 
vidual channels  in  multiplex;  (e)  Several  functions  of  several 
variables  — in  color  television  the  message  consists  of  three 
functions  fix,  y,  t),  gix,  y,  t),  h(x,  y,  t)  defined  in  a three- 
dimensional  continuum  — we  may  also  think  of  these  three  func- 
tions as  components  of  a vector  field  defined  in  the  region  — 
similarly,  several  black  and  white  television  sources  would  pro- 
duce “messages”  consisting  of  a number  of  functions  of  three 
variables;  (f)  Various  combinations  also  occur,  for  example  in 
television  with  an  associated  audio  channel. 

2.  A transmitter  which  operates  on  the  message  in  some  way  to 
produce  a signal  suitable  for  transmission  over  the  channel.  In 
telephony  this  operation  consists  merely  of  changing  sound  pres- 
sure into  a proportional  electrical  current.  In  telegraphy  we  have 
an  encoding  operation  which  produces  a sequence  of  dots,  dashes 
and  spaces  on  the  channel  corresponding  to  the  message.  In  a 
multiplex  PCM  system  the  different  speech  functions  must  be 
sampled,  compressed,  quantized  and  encoded,  and  finally  inter- 


u 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


INFORMATION 

SOURCE  TRANSMITTER  RECEIVER  DESTINATION 


NOISE 

SOURCE 


Fig.  1.  — Schematic  diagram  of  a general  communication  system. 


leaved  properly  to  construct  the  signal.  Vocoder  systems,  tele- 
vision and  frequency  modulation  are  other  examples  of  complex 
operations  applied  to  the  message  to  obtain  the  signal. 

3.  The  channel  is  merely  the  medium  used  to  transmit  the 
signal  from  transmitter  to  receiver.  It  may  be  a pair  of  wires,  a 
coaxial  cable,  a band  of  radio  frequencies,  a beam  of  light,  etc. 
During  transmission,  or  at  one  of  the  terminals,  the  signal  may 
be  perturbed  by  noise.  This  is  indicated  schematically  in  Fig.  1 
by  the  noise  source  acting  on  the  transmitted  signal  to  produce 
the  received  signal. 

4.  The  receiver  ordinarily  performs  the  inverse  operation  of 
that  done  by  the  transmitter,  reconstructing  the  message  from 
the  signal. 

5.  The  destination  is  the  person  (or  thing)  for  whom  the  mes- 
sage is  intended. 

We  wish  to  consider  certain  general  problems  involving  com- 
munication systems.  To  do  this  it  is  first  necessary  to  represent 
the  various  elements  involved  as  mathematical  entities,  suitably 
idealized  from  their  physical  counterparts.  We  may  roughly 
classify  communication  systems  into  three  main  categories: 
discrete,  continuous  and  mixed.  By  a discrete  system  we  will 
mean  one  in  which  both  the  message  and  the  signal  are  a sequence 
of  discrete  symbols.  A typical  case  is  telegraphy  where  the  mes- 
sage is  a sequence  of  letters  and  the  signal  a sequence  of  dots, 
dashes  and  spaces.  A continuous  system  is  one  in  which  the 


Introduction 




message  and  signal  are  both  treated  as  continuous  functions, 
e.g.,  radio  or  television.  A mixed  system  is  one  in  which  both 
discrete  and  continuous  variables  appear,  e.g.,  PCM  transmission 
of  speech. 

We  first  consider  the  discrete  case.  This  case  has  applications 
not  only  in  communication  theory,  but  also  in  the  theory  of 
computing  machines,  the  design  of  telephone  exchanges  and  other 
fields.  In  addition  the  discrete  case  forms  a foundation  for  the 
continuous  and  mixed  cases  which  will  be  treated  in  the  second 
half  of  the  paper. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 


1.  The  Discrete  Noiseless  Channel 

Teletype  and  telegraphy  are  two  simple  examples  of  a discrete 
channel  for  transmitting  information.  Generally,  a discrete  chan- 
nel will  mean  a system  whereby  a sequence  of  choices  from  a 
finite  set  of  elementary  symbols  & • • • S»  can  be  transmitted 
from  one  point  to  another.  Each  of  the  symbols  Si  is  assumed  to 
have  a certain  duration  in  time  U seconds  (not  necessarily  the 
same  for  different  Si,  for  example  the  dots  and  dashes  in  teleg- 
raphy). It  is  not  required  that  all  possible  sequences  of  the  Si  be 
capable  of  transmission  on  the  system;  certain  sequences  only 
may  be  allowed.  These  will  be  possible  signals  for  the  channel. 
Thus  in  telegraphy  suppose  the  symbols  are:  (1)  A dot,  consist- 
ing of  line  closure  for  a unit  of  time  and  then  line  open  for  a unit 
of  time;  (2)  A dash,  consisting  of  three  time  units  of  closure 
and  one  unit  open;  (3)  A letter  space  consisting  of,  say,  three 
units  of  line  open;  (4)  A word  space  of  six  units  of  line  open.  We 
might  place  the  restriction  on  allowable  sequences  that  no  spaces 
follow  each  other  (for  if  two  letter  spaces  are  adjacent,  they  are 
identical  with  a word  space).  The  question  we  now  consider  is 
how  one  can  measure  the  capacity  of  such  a channel  to  transmit 
information. 

In  the  teletype  case  where  all  symbols  are  of  the  same  duration, 
and  any  sequence  of  the  32  symbols  is  allowed,  the  answer  is  easy. 
Each  symbol  represents  five  bits  of  information.  If  the  system 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




transmits  n symbols  per  second  it  is  natural  to  say  that  the 
channel  has  a capacity  of  5 n bits  per  second.  This  does  not  mean 
that  the  teletype  channel  will  always  be  transmitting  information 
at  this  rate  — this  is  the  maximum  possible  rate  and  whether  or 
not  the  actual  rate  reaches  this  maximum  depends  on  the  source 
of  information  which  feeds  the  channel,  as  will  appear  later. 

In  the  more  general  case  with  different  lengths  of  symbols  and 
constraints  on  the  allowed  sequences,  we  make  the  following 
definition:  The  capacity  C of  a discrete  channel  is  given  by 


C 


Lim 

T—>  00 


log  N(T) 
T 


where  N(T)  is  the  number  of  allowed  signals  of  duration  T. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  in  the  teletype  case  this  reduces  to  the 
previous  result.  It  can  be  shown  that  the  limit  in  question  will 
exist  as  a finite  number  in  most  cases  of  interest.  Suppose  all 
sequences  of  the  symbols  Si,  • • • , S»  are  allowed  and  these 
symbols  have  durations  ti}  • • • , tn.  What  is  the  channel 
capacity?  If  N(t)  represents  the  number  of  sequences  of  duration 
t we  have 


N(t)  = N(t  - ti)  4-  N(t  - t2)  + • • • + N(t  - tn). 


The  total  number  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  numbers  of  sequences 
ending  in  Sx,  S2,  • • • , S„  and  these  are  N{t  — tx) , N{t  — t2), 
• • • , N (t  — tn) , respectively.  According  to  a well-known  result 
in  finite  differences,  N(t)  is  the  asymptotic  for  large  t to  AX d 
where  A is  constant  and  X0  is  the  largest  real  solution  of  the 
characteristic  equation: 

X~ti  -j-  X~**  -f-  • • ■ X~tn  = 1 

and  therefore 

n T . log  AX o , 

C = Lim = = log  X0. 

l — J 

In  case  there  are  restrictions  on  allowed  sequences  we  may  still 
often  obtain  a difference  equation  of  this  type  and  find  C from 
the  characteristic  equation.  In  the  telegraphy  case  mentioned 
above 

N(t)  = N(t  - 2)  + N(t  - 4)  + N(t  - 5)  + N(t  - 7) 

+ N{t-  8)  +N{t-  10) 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


as  we  see  by  counting  sequences  of  symbols  according  to  the 
last  or  next  to  the  last  symbol  occurring.  Hence  C is  — log  p0 
where  jx0  is  the  positive  root  of  1 = y2  + y4  + y5  + p1  + fis  + 
/a10.  Solving  this  we  find  C = 0.539. 

A very  general  type  of  restriction  which  may  be  placed  on 
allowed  sequences  is  the  following:  We  imagine  a number  of 
possible,  states  alt  a2,  • • • , a«.  For  each  state  only  certain 
symbols  from  the  set  S1}  • • • , Sn  can  be  transmitted  (different 
subsets  for  the  different  states).  When  one  of  these  has  been 
transmitted  the  state  changes  to  a new  state  depending  both  on 
the  old  state  and  the  particular  symbol  transmitted.  The  tele- 
graph case  is  a simple  example  of  this.  There  are  two  states 
depending  on  whether  or  not  a space  was  the  last  symbol  trans- 
mitted. If  so,  then  only  a dot  or  a dash  can  be  sent  next  and  the 
state  always  changes.  If  not,  any  symbol  can  be  transmitted  and 
the  state  changes  if  a space  is  sent,  otherwise  it  remains  the  same. 
The  conditions  can  be  indicated  in  a linear  graph  as  shown  in 
Fig.  2.  The  junction  points  correspond  to  the  states  and  the  lines 
indicate  the  symbols  possible  in  a state  and  the  resulting  state. 
In  Appendix  1 it  is  shown  that  if  the  conditions  on  allowed 
sequences  can  be  described  in  this  form  C will  exist  and  can  be 
calculated  in  accordance  with  the  following  result: 

Theorem  1 : Let  b^j  be  the  duration  of  the  sth  symbol  which  is 
allowable  in  state  i and  leads  to  stage  j.  Then  the  channel  ca- 
pacity C is  equal  to  log  W where  W is  the  largest  real  root  of  the 
determinantal  equation: 

I'Zw-W-  Sa  | = 0 

where  8a  = 1 if  i = j and  is  zero  otherwise. 

DASH 


Fig.  2. — Graphical  representation  of  the  constraints  on  telegraph  symbols. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




For  example,  in  the  telegraph  case  (Fig.  2)  the  determinant  is: 

- 1 (W-2  4-  W~4) 

= 0. 

(IF-3  + IF  6)  (IF-2  + IF-4  - 1) 

On  expansion  this  leads  to  the  equation  given  above  for  this  set 
of  constraints. 


2.  The  Discrete  Source  of  Information 

We  have  seen  that  under  very  general  conditions  the  logarithm 
of  the  number  of  possible  signals  in  a discrete  channel  increases 
linearly  with  time.  The  oapacity  to  transmit  information  can  be 
specified  by  giving  this  rate  of  increase,  the  number  of  bits  per 
second  required  to  specify  the  particular  signal  used. 

We  now  consider  the  information  source.  How  is  an  information 
source  to  be  described  mathematically,  and  how  much  informa- 
tion in  bits  per  second  is  produced  in  a given  source?  The  main 
point  at  issue  is  the  effect  of  statistical  knowledge  about  the 
source  in  reducing  the  required  capacity  of  the  channel,  by  the 
use  of  proper  encoding  of  the  information.  In  telegraphy,  for 
example,  the  messages  to  be  transmitted  consist  of  sequences  of 
letters.  These  sequences,  however,  are  not  completely  random. 
In  general,  they  form  sentences  and  have  the  statistical  structure 
of,  say,  English.  The  letter  E occurs  more  frequently  than  Q, 
the  sequence  TH  more  frequently  than  XP,  etc.  The  existence  of 
this  structure  allows  one  to  make  a saving  in  time  (or  channel 
capacity)  by  properly  encoding  the  message  sequences  into  signal 
sequences.  This  is  already  done  to  a limited  extent  in  telegraphy 
by  using  the  shortest  channel  symbol,  a dot,  for  the  most  common 
English  letter  E;  while  the  infrequent  letters,  Q,  X,  Z are  repre- 
sented by  longer  sequences  of  dots  and  dashes.  This  idea  is 
carried  still  further  in  certain  commercial  codes  where  common 
words  and  phrases  are  represented  by  four-  or  five-letter  code 
groups  with  a considerable  saving  in  average  time.  The  stand- 
ardized greeting  and  anniversary  telegrams  now  in  use  extend 
this  to  the  point  of  encoding  a sentence  or  two  into  a relatively 
short  sequence  of  numbers. 

We  can  think  of  a discrete  source  as  generating  the  message, 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 




symbol  by  symbol.  It  will  choose  successive  symbols  according  to 
certain  probabilities  depending,  in  general,  on  preceding  choices 
as  well  as  the  particular  symbols  in  question.  A physical  system, 
or  a mathematical  model  of  a system  which  produces  such  a 
sequence  of  symbols  governed  by  a set  of  probabilities,  is  known 
as  a stochastic  process.3  We  may  consider  a discrete  source,  there- 
fore, to  be  represented  by  a stochastic  process.  Conversely,  any 
stochastic  process  which  produces  a discrete  sequence  of  symbols 
chosen  from  a finite  set  may  be  considered  a discrete  source. 
This  will  include  such  cases  as: 

1.  Natural  written  languages  such  as  English,  German,  Chinese. 

2.  Continuous  information  sources  that  have  been  rendered  dis- 
crete by  some  quantizing  process.  For  example,  the  quantized 
speech  from  a PCM  transmitter,  or  a quantized  television 
signal. 

3.  Mathematical  cases  where  we  merely  define  abstractly  a 
stochastic  process  which  generates  a sequence  of  symbols.  The 
following  are  examples  of  this  last  type  of  source. 

(A)  Suppose  we  have  five  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E which  are  chosen 
each  with  probability  .2,  successive  choices  being  independ- 
ent. This  would  lead  to  a sequence  of  which  the  following 
is  a typical  example. 

BDCBCECCCADCBDDAAECEEAABBD 

AEECACEEBAEECBCEAD. 

This  was  constructed  with  the  use  of  a table  of  random 
numbers.4 

(B)  Using  the  same  five  letters  let  the  probabilities  be  .4,  .1,  .2, 
.2,  .1,  respectively,  with  successive  choices  independent.  A 
typical  message  from  this  source  is  then: 
AAACDCBDCEAADADACEDAEADCA 
BEDADDCECAAAAAD. 

(C)  A more  complicated  structure  is  obtained  if  successive 
symbols  are  not  chosen  independently  but  their  probabilities 

3 See,  for  example,  S.  Chandrasekhar,  “Stochastic  Problems  in  Physics  and 
Astronomy,”  Reviews  of  Modern  Physics,  v.  15,  No.  1,  January  1943,  p.  1. 

* Kendall  and  Smith,  Tables  of  Random  Sampling  Numbers,  Cambridge, 
1939. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




depend  on  preceding  letters.  In  the  simplest  case  of  this  type 
a choice  depends  only  on  the  preceding  letter  and  not  on 
ones  before  that.  The  statistical  structure  can  then  be  de- 
scribed by  a set  of  transition  probabilities  Pi(j),  the  prob- 
ability that  letter  i is  followed  by  letter  j.  The  indices  i and 
j range  over  all  the  possible  symbols.  A second  equivalent 
way  of  specifying  the  structure  is  to  give  the  “digram” 
probabilities  p(i,j),  i.e.,  the  relative  frequency  of  the  di- 
gram i j.  The  letter  frequencies  p(i),  (the  probability  of 
letter  i),  the  transition  probabilities  Pi(j)  and  the  digram 
probabilities  p(i,j)  are  related  by  the  following  formulas: 

p(i)  =llp(i,j)  =Sp(i,i)  = Hlp{j)pj(i) 

J 1 3 

p(hj)  = P(i)Pi(j) 

2pt(i)  = 2p(*')  =Jlp(ij)  = i. 

3 l tl  1 

As  a specific  example  suppose  there  are  three  letters  A,  B, 
C with  the  probability  tables: 


PiU) 


i 

p(i) 

v(hj) 


A 

B 

C 

A 

B 

C 

A 






A 



A 






i B 


~2 




B 



i B 






c 




c 


c 











A typical  message  from  this  source  is  the  following: 

ABBABABABABABABBBABBBBBABA 

BABABABBBACACABBABBBBABBAB 

ACBBBABA. 

The  next  increase  in  complexity  would  involve  trigram 
frequencies  but  no  more.  The  choice  of  a letter  would  de- 
pend on  the  preceding  two  letters  but  not  on  the  message 
before  that  point.  A set  of  trigram  frequencies  p(i,  j,  k ) or 
equivalently  a set  of  transition  probabilities  Pa(k)  would 
be  required.  Continuing  in  this  way  one  obtains  successively 
more  complicated  stochastic  processes.  In  the  general  n-gram 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


case  a set  of  n-gram  probabilities  p(ii,  i2,  • * • , in)  or  of 
transition  probabilities  pil}  i2,  • • • , is  required  to 

specify  the  statistical  structure. 


(D)  Stochastic  processes  can  also  be  defined  which  produce  a 
text  consisting  of  a sequence  of  “words.”  Suppose  there  are 
five  letters  A,  B,  C,  D,  E and  16  “words”  in  the  language 
with  associated  probabilities: 


.10  A 

.04  ADEB 
.05  ADEE 
.01  BADD 


.16  BEBE 
.04  BED 
.02  BEED 
.05  CA 


.11  CABED 
.05  CEED 
.08  DAB 
.04  DAD 


.04  DEB 
.15  DEED 
.01  EAB 
.05  EE 


Suppose  successive  “words”  are  chosen  independently  and 
are  separated  by  a space.  A typical  message  might  be: 

DAB  EE  A BEBE  DEED  DEB  ADEE  ADEE  EE  DEB 
BEBE  BEBE  BEBE  ADEE  BED  DEED  DEED  CEED 
ADEE  A DEED  DEED  BEBE  CABED  BEBE  BED  DAB 
DEED  ADEB. 


If  all  the  words  are  of  finite  length  this  process  is  equivalent 
to  one  of  the  preceding  type,  but  the  description  may  be 
simpler  in  terms  of  the  word  structure  and  probabilities.  We 
may  also  generalize  here  and  introduce  transition  probabil- 
ities between  words,  etc. 


These  artificial  languages  are  useful  in  constructing  simple 
problems  and  examples  to  illustrate  various  possibilities.  We  can 
also  approximate  to  a natural  language  by  means  of  a series  of 
simple  artificial  languages.  The  zero-order  approximation  is  ob- 
tained by  choosing  all  letters  with  the  same  probability  and  in- 
dependently. The  first-order  approximation  is  obtained  by  choos- 
ing successive  letters  independently  but  each  letter  having  the 
same  probability  that  it  has  in  the  natural  language.5  Thus,  in 
the  first-order  approximation  to  English,  E is  chosen  with  prob- 
ability .12  (its  frequency  in  normal  English)  and  W with  proba- 
bility .02,  but  there  is  no  influence  between  adjacent  letters  and 
no  tendency  to  form  the  preferred  digrams  such  as  TH,  ED,  etc. 


5 Letter,  digram  and  trigram  frequencies  are  given  in  Secret  and  Urgent  by 
Fletcher  Pratt,  Blue  Ribbon  Books,  1939.  Word  frequencies  are  tabulated 
in  Relative  Frequency  oj  English  Speech  Sounds,  G.  Dewey,  Harvard  Uni- 
versity Press,  1923. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




In  the  second-order  approximation,  digram  structure  is  intro- 
duced. After  a letter  is  chosen,  the  next  one  is  chosen  in  accord- 
ance with  the  frequencies  with  which  the  various  letters  follow 
the  first  one.  This  requires  a table  of  digram  frequencies 
In  the  third-order  approximation,  trigram  structure  is  introduced. 
Each  letter  is  chosen  with  probabilities  which  depend  on  the  pre- 
ceding two  letters. 


3.  The  Series  of  Approximations  to  English 

To  give  a visual  idea  of  how  this  series  of  processes  approaches  a 
language,  typical  sequences  in  the  approximations  to  English 
have  been  constructed  and  are  given  below.  In  all  cases  we  have 
assumed  a 27-symbol  “alphabet,”  the  26  letters  and  a space. 

1.  Zero-order  approximation  (symbols  independent  and  equi- 
probable) . 

XFOML  RXKHRJFFJUJ  ZLPWCFWKCYJ  FFJEYV- 
KCQSGHYD  QPAAMKBZAACIBZLHJQD. 

2.  First-order  approximation  (symbols  independent  but  with 
frequencies  of  English  text) . 

OCRO  HLI  RGWR  NMIELWIS  EU  LL  NBNESEBYA 
TH  EEI  ALHENHTTPA  OOBTTYA  NAH  BRL. 

3.  Second-order  approximation  (digram  structure  as  in  Eng- 
lish) . 

ON  IE  ANTSOUTINYS  ARE  T INCTORE  ST  BE  S 
DEAMY  ACHIN  D ILONASIVE  TUCOOWE  AT  TEA- 
SONARE  FUSO  TIZIN  ANDY  TOBE  SEACE  CTISBE. 

4.  Third-order  approximation  (trigram  structure  as  in  English). 

IN  NO  1ST  LAT  WHEY  CRATICT  FROURE  BIRS 
GROCID  PONDENOME  OF  DEMONSTURES  OF 
THE  REPTAGIN  IS  REGOACTIONA  OF  CRE. 

5.  First-order  word  approximation.  Rather  than  continue  with 
tetragram,  • • • , n-gram  structure  it  is  easier  and  better  to 
jump  at  this  point  to  word  units.  Here  words  are  chosen 
independently  but  with  their  appropriate  frequencies. 

REPRESENTING  AND  SPEEDILY  IS  AN  GOOD  APT 
OR  COME  CAN  DIFFERENT  NATURAL  HERE  HE 


44  The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 

THE  A IN  CAME  THE  TO  OF  TO  EXPERT  GRAY 
COME  TO  FURNISHES  THE  LINE  MESSAGE  HAD 
BE  THESE. 

6.  Second-order  word  approximation.  The  word  transition  prob- 
abilities are  correct  but  no  further  structure  is  included. 
THE  HEAD  AND  IN  FRONTAL  ATTACK  ON  AN 
ENGLISH  WRITER  THAT  THE  CHARACTER  OF 
THIS  POINT  IS  THEREFORE  ANOTHER  METHOD 
FOR  THE  LETTERS  THAT  THE  TIME  OF  WHO 
EVER  TOLD*  THE  PROBLEM  FOR  AN  UNEX- 
PECTED. 

The  resemblance  to  ordinary  English  text  increases  quite  no- 
ticeably at  each  of  the  above  steps.  Note  that  these  samples  have 
reasonably  good  structure  out  to  about  twice  the  range  that  is 
taken  into  account  in  their  construction.  Thus  in  (3)  the  statis- 
tical process  insures  reasonable  text  for  two-letter  sequences,  but 
four-letter  sequences  from  the  sample  can  usually  be  fitted  into 
good  sentences.  In  (6)  sequences  of  four  or  more  words  can  easily 
be  placed  in  sentences  without  unusual  or  strained  constructions. 
The  particular  sequence  of  ten  words  “ attack  on  an  English  writer 
that  the  character  of  this”  is  not  at  all  unreasonable.  It  appears 
then  that  a sufficiently  complex  stochastic  process  will  give  a 
satisfactory  representation  of  a discrete  source. 

The  first  two  samples  were  constructed  by  the  use  of  a book  of 
random  numbers  in  conjunction  with  (for  example  2)  a table  of 
letter  frequencies.  This  method  might  have  been  continued  for 
(3),  (4)  and  (5),  since  digram,  trigram  and  word  frequency 
tables  are  available,  but  a simpler  equivalent  method  was  used. 
To  construct  (3)  for  example,  one  opens  a book  at  random  and 
selects  a letter  at  random  on  the  page.  This  letter  is  recorded. 
The  book  is  then  opened  to  another  page  and  one  reads  until  this 
letter  is  encountered.  The  succeeding  letter  is  then  recorded. 
Turning  to  another  page  this  second  letter  is  searched  for  and  the 
succeeding  letter  recorded,  etc.  A similar  process  was  use  for  (4) , 
(5)  and  (6).  It  would  be  interesting  if  further  approximations 
could  be  constructed,  but  the  labor  involved  becomes  enormous 
at  the  next  stage. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




4.  Graphical  Representation  of  a Markoff  Process 

Stochastic  processes  of  the  type  described  above  are  known  math- 
ematically as  discrete  Markoff  processes  and  have  been  exten- 
sively studied  in  the  literature.6  The  general  case  can  be  described 
as  follows:  There  exist  a finite  number  of  possible  “states”  of  a 
system;  Si,  S2,  • • • , Sn . In  addition  there  is  a set  of  transition 
probabilities,  pi(j) , the  probability  that  if  the  system  is  in  state 
Si  it  will  next  go  to  state  Sj.  To  make  this  Markoff  process  into  an 
information  source  we  need  only  assume  that  a letter  is  produced 
for  each  transition  from  one  state  to  another.  The  states  will  cor- 
respond to  the  “residue  of  influence”  from  preceding  letters. 

The  situation  can  be  represented  graphically  as  shown  in  Figs. 
3,  4 and  5.  The  “states”  are  the  junction  points  in  the  graph  and 
the  probabilities  and  letters  produced  for  a transition  are  given 
beside  the  corresponding  line.  Figure  3 is  for  the  example  B in 
Section  2,  while  Fig.  4 corresponds  to  the  example  C.  In  Fig.  3 
there  is  only  one  state  since  successive  letters  are  independent.  In 
Fig.  4 there  are  as  many  states  as  letters.  If  a trigram  example 
were  constructed  there  would  be  at  most  n2  states  corresponding 
to  the  possible  pairs  of  letters  preceding  the  one  being  chosen. 
Figure  5 is  a graph  for  the  case  of  word  structure  in  example  D. 
Here  S corresponds  to  the  “space”  symbol. 


5.  Ergodie  and  Mixed  Sources 

As  we  have  indicated  above  a discrete  source  for  our  purposes  can 
be  considered  to  be  represented  by  a Markoff  process.  Among  the 
possible  discrete  Markoff  processes  there  is  a group  with  special 
properties  of  significance  in  communication  theory.  This  special 
class  consists  of  the  “ergodie”  processes  and  we  shall  call  the 
corresponding  sources  ergodie  sources.  Although  a rigorous  defi- 
nition of  an  ergodie  process  is  somewhat  involved,  the  general 
idea  is  simple.  In  an  ergodie  process  every  sequence  produced  by 
the  process  is  the  same  in  statistical  properties.  Thus  the  letter 
frequencies,  digram  frequencies,  etc.,  obtained  from  particular 
sequences,  will,  as  the  lengths  of  the  sequences  increase,  approach 

6 For  a detailed  treatment  see  M.  Frechet,  Methods  des  fonctions  arbitraires. 
Theorie  des  enenements  en  chaine  dans  le  cas  d’un  nombre  fini  d’etats  pos- 
sibles. Paris,  Gauthier  Villars,  1938. 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 




definite  limits  independent  of  the  particular  sequence.  Actually 
this  is  not  true  of  every  sequence  but  the  set  for  which  it  is  false 
has  probability  zero.  Roughly  the  ergodic  property  means  sta- 
tistical homogeneity. 


Fig.  3.  — A graph  corresponding  to  the  source  in  example  B. 


Fig.  4.  — A graph  corresponding  to  the  source  in  example  C. 


Fig.  5.  — A graph  corresponding  to  the  source  in  example  D. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 


All  the  examples  of  artificial  languages  given  above  are  ergodic. 
This  property  is  related  to  the  structure  of  the  corresponding 
graph.  If  the  graph  has  the  following  two  properties7  the  corre- 
sponding process  will  be  ergodic: 

1.  The  graph  does  not  consist  of  two  isolated  parts  A and  B 
such  that  it  is  impossible  to  go  from  junction  points  in  part 
A to  junction  points  in  part  B along  lines  of  the  graph  in  the 
direction  of  arrows  and  also  impossible  to  go  from  junctions 
in  part  B to  junctions  in  part  A. 

2.  A closed  series  of  lines  in  the  graph  with  all  arrows  on  the 
lines  pointing  in  the  same  orientation  will  be  called  a “cir- 
cuit.” The  “length”  of  a circuit  is  the  number  of  lines  in  it. 
Thus  in  Fig.  5 series  BEBES  is  a circuit  of  length  5.  The 
second  property  required  is  that  the  greatest  common  divisor 
of  the  lengths  of  all  circuits  in  the  graph  be  one. 

If  the  first  condition  is  satisfied  but  the  second  one  violated  by 
having  the  greatest  common  divisor  equal  to  d > 1,  the  sequences 
have  a certain  type  of  periodic  structure.  The  various  sequences 
fall  into  d different  classes  which  are  statistically  the  same  apart 
from  a shift  of  the  origin  (i.e.,  which  letter  in  the  sequence  is 
called  letter  1).  By  a shift  of  from  0 up  to  d — 1 any  sequence 
can  be  made  statistically  equivalent  to  any  other.  A simple  ex- 
ample with  d = 2 is  the  following:  There  are  three  possible  letters 
a,  b,  c.  Letter  a is  followed  with  either  b or  c with  probabilities 

and  § respectively.  Either  b or  c is  always  followed  by  letter  a. 
Thus  a typical  sequence  is 

abacacacabacababacac. 

This  type  of  situation  is  not  of  much  importance  for  our  work. 

If  the  first  condition  is  violated  the  graph  may  be  separated 
into  a set  of  subgraphs  each  of  which  satisfies  the  first  condition. 
We  will  assume  that  the  second  condition  is  also  satisfied  for 
each  subgraph.  We  have  in  this  case  what  may  be  called  a 
“mixed”  source  made  up  of  a number  of  pure  components.  The 
components  correspond  to  the  various  subgraphs.  If  Lu  L2,  L3, 
• • • are  the  component  sources  we  may  write 


7 These  are  restatements  in  terms  of  the  graph  of  conditions  given  in 
Frechet. 


4S 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


L — ptLx  + p2L2  + p$L3  + • • • 

where  Pi  is  the  probability  of  the  component  source  Li. 

Physically  the  situation  represented  is  this:  There  are  several 
different  sources  Llf  L2,  L3,  • • • which  are  each  of  homogeneous 
statistical  structure  (i.e.,  they  are  ergodic).  We  do  not  know 
a priori  which  is  to  be  used,  but  once  the  sequence  starts  in  a 
given  pure  component  Liy  it  continues  indefinitely  according  to 
the  statistical  structure  of  that  component. 

As  an  example  one  may  take  two  of  the  processes  defined  above 
and  assume  pt  = .2  and  p2  = .8.  A sequence  from  the  mixed 
source 

L = 2LX  + .8 L2 

would  be  obtained  by  choosing  first  Lx  or  L2  with  probabilities  .2 
and  .8  and  after  this  choice  generating  a sequence  from  which- 
ever was  chosen. 

Except  when  the  contrary  is  stated  we  shall  assume  a source  to 
be  ergodic.  This  assumption  enables  one  to  identify  averages 
along  a sequence  with  averages  over  the  ensemble  of  possible  se- 
quences (the  probability  of  a discrepancy  being  zero).  For  ex- 
ample the  relative  frequency  of  the  letter  A in  a particular  infi- 
nite sequence  will  be,  with  probability  one,  equal  to  its  relative 
frequency  in  the  ensemble  of  sequences. 

If  Pi  is  the  probability  of  state  i and  pi  ( j ) the  transition  prob- 
ability to  state  j,  then  for  the  process  to  be  stationary  it  is  clear 
that  the  Pi  must  satisfy  equilibrium  conditions: 

px  = 23PiPi(i). 

i 

In  the  ergodic  case  it  can  be  shown  that  with  any  starting  condi- 
tions the  probabilities  Pj  (N)  of  being  in  state  j after  N symbols, 
approach  the  equilibrium  values  as  N — » 00 . 


6.  Choice,  Uncertainty  and  Entropy 

We  have  represented  a discrete  information  source  as  a Markoff 
process.  Can  we  define  a quantity  which  will  measure,  in  some 
sense,  how  much  information  is  “produced”  by  such  a process,  or 
better,  at  what  rate  information  is  produced? 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 


Suppose  we  have  a set  of  possible  events  whose  probabilities  of 
occurrence  are  pu  p2,  • • • , pn.  These  probabilities  are  known  but 
that  is  all  we  know  concerning  which  event  will  occur.  Can  we 
find  a measure  of  how  much  “choice”  is  involved  in  the  selection 
of  the  event  or  of  how  uncertain  we  are  of  the  outcome? 

If  there  is  such  a measure,  say  H(p 1?  p2,  * * • , pn) , it  is  reason- 
able to  require  of  it  the  following  properties : 

1.  H should  be  continuous  in  the  Pi. 

2.  If  all  the  pi  are  equal,  Pi  = then  H should  be  a mono- 
tonic increasing  function  of  n.  With  equally  likely  events 
there  is  more  choice,  or  uncertainty,  when  there  are  more 
possible  events. 

3.  If  a choice  be  broken  down  into  two  successive  choices,  the 
original  H should  be  the  weighted  sum  of  the  individual 
values  of  H.  The  meaning  of  this  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  6.  At 
the  left  we  have  three  possibilities  Pi  = b p2  = p3  = b 
On  the  right  we  first  choose  between  two  possibilities  each 
with  probability  |,  and  if  the  second  occurs  make  another 
choice  with  probabilities  f,  $.  The  final  results  have  the 
same  probabilities  as  before.  We  require,  in  this  special  case, 
that 

H(bhh)  =H(bh)+±H(  §,i). 

The  coefficient  \ is  the  weighting  factor  introduced  because  this 
second  choice  only  occurs  half  the  time. 


Fig.  6.  — Decomposition  of  a choice  from  three  possibilities. 


In  Appendix  2,  the  following  result  is  established: 

Theorem  2:  The  only  H satisfying  the  three  above  assumptions 
is  of  the  form: 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


H = — K^L*pi  log  pi 

i=l 

where  K is  a positive  constant. 

This  theorem,  and  the  assumptions  required  for  its  proof,  are  in 
no  way  necessary  for  the  present  theory.  It  is  given  chiefly  to 
lend  a certain  plausibility  to  some  of  our  later  definitions.  The 
real  justification  of  these  definitions,  however,  will  reside  in  their 
implications. 

Quantities.. of  the  form  H = — X pi  log  pi  (the  constant  K 
merely  amounts  to  a choice  of  a unit  of  measure)  play  a central 
role  in  information  theory  as  measures  of  information,  choice  and 
uncertainty.  The  form  of  H will  be  recognized  as  that  of  entropy 


1.0 

.9 
.8 
.7 

H .6 
BITS 

.5 
.4 
.3 
.2 
.1 

Fig.  7.  — Entropy  in  the  case  of  two  possibilities  with  probabilities  p and  (1 — p). 


as  defined  in  certain  formulations  of  statistical  mechanics8  where 
Pi  is  the  probability  of  a system  being  in  cell  i of  its  phase  space. 

8 See,  for  example,  R.  C.  Tolman,  Principles  of  Statistical  Mechanics,  Ox- 
ford, Clarendon,  1938. 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




H is  then,  for  example,  the  H in  Boltzmann’s  famous  H theorem. 
We  shall  call  H = — X pt  log  pi  the  entropy  of  the  set  of  proba- 
bilities p1}  • • • , pn ■ If  £ is  a chance  variable  we  will  write  H ( x ) 
for  its  entropy;  thus  x is  not  an  argument  of  a function  but  a 
label  for  a number,  to  differentiate  it  from  H(y)  say,  the  entropy 
of  the  chance  variable  y. 

The  entropy  in  the  case  of  two  possibilities  with  probabilities  p 
and  q = 1 — p,  namely 

H = — (p  log  p + q log  q) 

is  plotted  in  Fig.  7 as  a function  of  p. 

The  quantity  H has  a number  of  interesting  properties  which 
further  substantiate  it  as  a reasonable  measure  of  choice  or 
information. 

1.  H = 0 if  and  only  if  all  the  pi  but  one  are  zero,  this  one 
having  the  value  unity.  Thus  only  when  we  are  certain  of  the  out- 
come does  H vanish.  Otherwise  H is  positive. 

2.  For  a given  n,  H is  a maximum  and  equal  to  log  n when  all 

the  pi  are  equal,  i.e.,  This  is  also  intuitively  the  most  uncertain 
situation. 

3.  Suppose  there  are  two  events,  x and  y,  in  question,  with  m 
possibilities  for  the  first  and  n for  the  second.  Let  p (i,  j)  be  the 
probability  of  the  joint  occurrence  of  i for  the  first  and  j for  the 
second.  The  entropy  of  the  joint  event  is 

H(x,  y)  = - lLp(i,j)  log  p(i,j) 

l%  3 

while 

H{x)  = -Hp(i,j)  log  12p(i,j) 

i,3  3 

H(y ) = - Yfp(i,j)  log Y,p(i,j). 

1,2  1 

It  is  easily  shown  that 

H(x,  y)  <H(x)  + H (y) 

with  equality  only  if  the  events  are  independent  (i.e.,  p(i,j)  = 
p(i)  p(j))-  The  uncertainty  of  a joint  event  is  less  than  or  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  individual  uncertainties. 

4.  Any  change  toward  equalization  of  the  probabilities  p1}  p2, 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


• • ’ ,pn  increases  H.  Thus  if  pt  < p2  and  we  increase  p,,  decreas- 
ing p2  an  equal  amount  so  that  px  and  p2  are  more  nearly  equal, 
then  H increases.  More  generally,  if  we  perform  any  “averaging” 
operation  on  the  Pi  of  the  form 


Pi  = an  Pi 
i 

where  Sat,-  = Sai}-  = 1,  and  all  an>  0,  then  H increases  (except 

i i 

in  the  special  case  where  this  transformation  amounts  to  no 
more  than  a permutation  of  the  p,-  with  H of  course  remaining 
the  same). 

5.  Suppose  there  are  two  chance  events  x and  y as  in  3,  not 
necessarily  independent.  For  any  particular  value  i that  x can 
assume  there  is  a conditional  probability  Pi(j)  that  y has  the 
value  j.  This  is  given  by 


PiU) 


V(.hj) 


We  define  the  conditional  entropy  of  y,  Hx{y ) as  the  average  of 
the  entropy  of  y for  each  value  of  x,  weighted  according  to  the 
probability  of  getting  that  particular  x.  That  is 

Hx(y)  = -Ep(i,i)  log  pi(j). 

i,  2 


This  quantity  measures  how  uncertain  we  are  of  y on  the  average 
when  we  know  x.  Substituting  the  value  of  Pi(j)  we  obtain 


Hx(y)  = -12p(i,j)  log  p(i,j)  +ZJp(f,i)  log llp(i,j) 

l,J  t,2  2 

= H(x,  y)  - H(x) 
or 

H(x,y)  =H(x ) +H.(y). 

The  uncertainty  (or  entropy)  of  the  joint  event  x,  y is  the  uncer- 
tainty of  x plus  the  uncertainty  of  y when  x is  known. 

6.  From  3 and  5 we  have 

H(x)  + H(y)  > H(x,y)  = H(x)  + H.{y). 


Hence 


H(y)  >Hx(y). 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




The  uncertainty  of  y is  never  increased  by  knowledge  of  x.  It  will 
be  decreased  unless  x and  y are  independent  events,  in  which  case 
it  is  not  changed. 


7.  The  Entropy  of  an  Information  Source 

Consider  a discrete  source  of  the  finite  state  type  considered 
above.  For  each  possible  state  i there  will  be  a set  of  probabilities 
Pi(j)  of  producing  the  various  possible  symbols  ;.  Thus  there  is 
an  entropy  Hi  for  each  state.  The  entropy  of  the  source  will  be 
defined  as  the  average  of  these  Hi  weighted  in  accordance  with 
the  probability  of  occurrence  of  the  states  in  question: 

H = iLPiHi 

i 

= - l^PiPiij)  log  Pi(J). 

if  7 

This  is  the  entropy  of  the  source  per  symbol  of  text.  If  the 
Markoff  process  is  proceeding  at  a definite  time  rate  there  is  also 
an  entropy  per  second. 

H'  = 

% 

were  fi  is  the  average  frequency  (occurrences  per  second)  of 
state  i.  Clearly 

W = mH 

where  m is  the  average  number  of  symbols  produced  per  second. 
H or  H ' measures  the  amount  of  information  generated  by  the 
source  per  symbol  or  per  second.  If  the  logarithmic  base  is  2, 
they  will  represent  bits  per  symbol  or  per  second. 

If  successive  symbols  are  independent  then  H is  simply 
— Xpi  log  pi  where  Pi  is  the  probability  of  symbol  i.  Suppose  in 
this  case  we  consider  a long  message  of  N symbols.  It  will  contain 
with  high  probability  about  piN  occurrences  of  the  first  symbol, 
p2N  occurrences  of  the  second,  etc.  Hence  the  probability  of  this 
particular  message  will  be  roughly 

p — p^N  pp2N  . . . ppnN 

log  p = N Hpi  log  pi 

i 


or 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 




log  p ==  — NH 
u ^ log  1/P 

H= n * 

H is  thus  approximately  the  logarithm  of  the  reciprocal  prob- 
ability of  a typical  long  sequence  divided  by  the  number  of 
symbols  in  the  sequence.  The  same  result  holds  for  any  source. 
Stated  more  precisely  we  have  (see  Appendix  3) : 

Theorem  3:  Given  any  e > 0 and  8 > 0,  we  can  find  an  N0 
such  that  the  sequences  of  any  length  N > N0  fall  into  two 
classes: 


1.  A set  whose  total  probability  is  less  than  e. 

2.  The  remainder,  all  of  whose  members  have  probabilities  satis- 
fying the  inequality 


log  P~l 
N 


- H 


<8. 


In  other  words  we  are  almost  certain  to  have 


log  p_1 
N 


very  close  to 


H when  N is  large. 

A closely  related  result  deals  with  the  number  of  sequences  of 
various  probabilities.  Consider  again  the  sequences  of  length  N 
and  let  them  be  arranged  in  order  of  decreasing  probability.  We 
define  n(q)  to  be  the  number  we  must  take  from  this  set  starting 
with  the  most  probable  one  in  order  to  accumulate  a total  prob- 
ability q for  those  taken. 


Theorem  4’ 


Lim 

JV— ►<» 


log  n(q) 
N 


= H 


when  q does  not  equal  0 or  1. 


We  may  interpret  log  n(q)  as  the  number  of  bits  required  to 
specify  the  sequence  when  we  consider  only  the  most  probable 


sequences  with  a total  probability  q.  Then 


logtt(g) 

N 


is  the  number 


of  bits  per  symbol  for  the  specification.  The  theorem  says  that  for 
large  N this  will  be  independent  of  q and  equal  to  H.  The  rate  of 
growth  of  the  logarithm  of  the  number  of  reasonably  probable 
sequences  is  given  by  H,  regardless  of  our  interpretation  of 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




“reasonably  probable.”  Due  to  these  results,  which  are  proved  in 
Appendix  3,  it  is  possible  for  most  purposes  to  treat  the  long 
sequences  as  though  there  were  just  2HN  of  them,  each  with  a 
probability  2~HN. 

The  next  two  theorems  show  that  H and  H ' can  be  determined 
by  limiting  operations  directly  from  the  statistics  of  the  message 
sequences,  without  reference  to  the  states  and  transition  prob- 
abilities between  states. 

Theorem  5:  Let  p(Bj)  be  the  probability  of  a sequence  Bi  of 
symbols  from  the  source.  Let 

Gn  = — -jj-  2-jp{Bi)  log  p{Bi) 


where  the  sum  is  over  all  sequences  Bi  containing  N symbols. 
Then  GN  is  a monotonic  decreasing  function  of  N and 

Lim  Gn  = H. 

N->  00 


Theorem  6:  Let  p(Bif  Sj)  be  the  probability  of  sequence  Bi 
followed  by  symbol  Sj  and  PmiSj)  = p(Bj,  Sj)/p{Bi)  be  the 
conditional  probability  of  Sj  after  Bi.  Let * 

Fn  = ~ • ^hp{Bi}  Sj)  log  ps>  (Sj ) 



where  the  sum  is  over  all  blocks  Bi  of  N — 1 symbols  and  over  all 
symbols  Sj.  Then  FN  is  a monotonic  decreasing  function  of  N, 


Fn  — NGn  — (N  — 1)  Gn- i, 


G 


N 



N 


Fn  < Gn , 


and  Lim  FN  = H. 

Ar— *<» 


These  results  are  derived  in  Appendix  3.  They  show  that  a 
series  of  approximations  to  H can  be  obtained  by  considering 
only  the  statistical  structure  of  the  sequences  extending  over  1,  2, 
• • • , N symbols.  FN  is  the  better  approximation.  In  fact  F N is 
the  entropy  of  the  Nth  order  approximation  to  the  source  of  the 
type  discussed  above.  If  there  are  no  statistical  influences  extend- 
ing over  more  than  N symbols,  that  is  if  the  conditional  prob- 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


ability  of  the  next  symbol  knowing  the  preceding  (N  — 1)  is 
not  changed  by  a knowledge  of  any  before  that,  then  F#  = H. 
Fn  of  course  is  the  conditional  entropy  of  the  next  symbol  when 
the  (N  — 1)  preceding  ones  are  known,  while  Gy  is  the  entropy 
per  symbol  of  blocks  of  N symbols. 

The  ratio  of  the  entropy  of  a source  to  the  maximum  value  it 
could  have  while  still  restricted  to  the  same  symbols  will  be 
called  its  relative  entropy.  This,  as  will  appear  later,  is  the  maxi- 
mum compression  possible  when  we  encode  into  the  same  alpha- 
bet. One  minus  the  relative  entropy  is  the  redundancy.  The 
redundancy  of  ordinary  English,  not  considering  statistical  struc- 
ture over  greater  distances  than  about  eight  letters,  is  roughly 
50%.  This  means  that  when  we  write  English  half  of  what  we 
write  is  determined  by  the  structure  of  the  language  and  half  is 
chosen  freely.  The  figure  50%  was  found  by  several  independent 
methods  which  all  gave  results  in  this  neighborhood.  One  is  by 
calculation  of  the  entropy  of  the  approximations  to  English.  A 
second  method  is  to  delete  a certain  fraction  of  the  letters  from  a 
sample  of  English  text  and  then  let  someone  attempt  to  restore 
them.  If  they  can  be  restored  when  50%  are  deleted  the  redun- 
dancy must  be  greater  than  50%.  A third  method  depends  on 
certain  known  results  in  cryptography. 

Two  extremes  of  redundancy  in  English  prose  are  represented 
by  Basic  English  and  by  James  Joyce’s  book  Finnegans  Wake. 
The  Basic  English  vocabulary  is  limited  to  850  words  and  the 
redundancy  is  very  high.  This  is  reflected  in  the  expansion  that 
occurs  when  a passage  is  translated  into  Basic  English.  Joyce 
on  the  other  hand  enlarges  the  vocabulary  and  is  alleged  to 
achieve  a compression  of  semantic  content. 

The  redundancy  of  a language  is  related  to  the  existence  of 
crossword  puzzles.  If  the  redundancy  is  zero  any  sequence  of 
letters  is  a reasonable  text  in  the  language  and  any  two-dimen- 
sional array  of  letters  forms  a crossword  puzzle.  If  the  redun- 
dancy is  too  high  the  language  imposes  too  many  constraints  for 
large  crossword  puzzles  to  be  possible.  A more  detailed  analysis 
shows  that  if  we  assume  the  constraints  imposed  by  the  language 
are  of  a rather  chaotic  and  random  nature,  large  crossword  puzzles 
are  just  possible  when  the  redundancy  is  50%.  If  the  redundancy 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




is  33%,  three-dimensional  crossword  puzzles  should  be  possible, 
etc. 


8.  Representation  of  the  Encoding  and  Decoding  Operations 

We  have  yet  to  represent  mathematically  the  operations  per- 
formed by  the  transmitter  and  receiver  in  encoding  and  decoding 
the  information.  Either  of  these  will  be  called  a discrete  trans- 
ducer. The  input  to  the  transducer  is  a sequence  of  input  sym- 
bols and  its  output  a sequence  of  output  symbols.  The  transducer 
may  have  an  internal  memory  so  that  its  output  depends  not 
only  on  the  present  input  symbol  but  also  on  the  past  history. 
We  assume  that  the  internal  memory  is  finite,  i.e.,  there  exist  a 
finite  number  m of  possible  states  of  the  transducer  and  that  its 
output  is  a function  of  the  present  state  and  the  present  input 
symbol.  The  next  state  will  be  a second  function  of  these  two 
quantities.  Thus  a transducer  can  be  described  by  two  functions: 

Vn  / (•£»*  <*n) 

<*»+i  Q (xn)  an) 

where: 

xn  is  the  nth  input  symbol. 

an  is  the  state  of  the  transducer  when  the  nth  input  symbol  is 
introduced, 

yn  is  the  output  symbol  (or  sequence  of  output  symbols)  pro- 
duced when  xn  is  introduced  if  the  state  is  <*„. 

If  the  output  symbols  of  one  transducer  can  be  identified  with 
the  input  symbols  of  a second,  they  can  be  connected  in  tandem 
and  the  result  is  also  a transducer.  If  there  exists  a second 
transducer  which  operates  on  the  output  of  the  first  and  recovers 
the  original  input,  the  first  transducer  will  be  called  non-singular 
and  the  second  will  be  called  its  inverse. 

Theorem  7:  The  output  of  a finite  state  transducer  driven  by  a 
finite  state  statistical  source  is  a finite  state  statistical  source , 
with  entropy  ( per  unit  time)  less  than  or  equal  to  that  of  the 
input . If  the  transducer  is  non-singular  they  are  equal. 

Let  a represent  the  state  of  the  source,  which  produces  a se- 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


quence  of  symbols  Xi’f  and  let  f3  be  the  state  of  the  transducer, 
which  produces,  in  its  output,  blocks  of  symbols  y The  combined 
system  can  be  represented  by  the  “product  state  space”  of  pairs 
(a,  ft).  Two  points  in  the  space  (<*i,  ftx)  and  (<*2,  fti) , are  con- 
nected by  a line  if  can  produce  an  x which  changes  ft i to  ft2, 
and  this  line  is  given  the  probability  of  that  x in  this  case.  The 
line  is  labeled  with  the  block  of  yx  symbols  produced  by  the 
transducer.  The  entropy  of  the  output  can  be  calculated  as  the 
weighted  sum  over  the  states.  If  we  sum  first  on  ft  each  resulting 
term  is  less  than  or  equal  to  the  corresponding  term  for  a,  hence 
the  entropy  is  not  increased.  If  the  transducer  is  non-singular 
let  its  output  be  connected  to  the  inverse  transducer.  If  H[,  H'2 
and  H'3  are  the  output  entropies  of  the  source,  the  first  and 
second  transducers  respectively,  then  H[  > H2  > H3  = H[  and 
therefore  H[  = H2. 

Suppose  we  have  a system  of  constraints  on  possible  sequences 
of  the  type  which  can  be  represented  by  a linear  graph  as  in 
Fig.  2.  If  probabilities  p(i)  were  assigned  to  the  various  lines 
connecting  state  i to  state  j this  would  become  a source.  There  is 
one  particular  assignment  which  maximizes  the  resulting  entropy 
(see  Appendix  4) . 

Theorem  8:  Let  the  system  of  constraints  considered  as  a chan- 
nel have  a capacity  C = log  W.  If  we  assign 

where  1$  is  the  duration  of  the  sth  symbol  leading  from  state  i to 
state  j and  the  Bi  satisfy 

Bi  = HBiW-l« 

8 . 1 

then  H is  maximized  and  equal  to  C. 

By  proper  assignment  of  the  transition  probabilities  the 
entropy  of  symbols  on  a channel  can  be  maximized  at  the 
channel  capacity. 


9.  The  Fundamental  Theorem  for  a Noiseless  Channel 

We  will  now  justify  our  interpretation  of  H as  the  rate  of  gen- 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




erating  information  by  proving  that  H determines  the  channel 
capacity  required  with  most  efficient  coding. 


Theorem  9:  Let  a source  have  entropy  H ( bits  per  symbol) 
and  a channel  have  a capacity  C ( bits  per  second).  Then  it  is 
possible  to  encode  the  output  of  the  source  in  such  a way  as  to 

C 

transmit  at  the  average  rate  -yf  — e symbols  per  second  over  the 


channel  where  e is  arbitrarily  small.  It  is  not  possible  to  transmit 

C 

at  an  average  rate  greater  than  ~. 

C 

The  converse  part  of  the  theorem,  that  cannot  be  exceeded, 


may  be  proved  by  noting  that  the  entropy  of  the  channel  input 
per  second  is  equal  to  that  of  the  source,  since  the  transmitter 
must  be  non-singular,  and  also  this  entropy  cannot  exceed  the 
channel  capacity.  Hence  //'  < C and  the  number  of  symbols  per 
second  = H'/H  < C/H. 

The  first  part  of  the  theorem  will  be  proved  in  two  different 
ways.  The  first  method  is  to  consider  the  set  of  all  sequences  of 
N symbols  produced  by  the  source.  For  N large  we  can  divide 
these  into  two  groups,  one  containing  less  than  2{H+V)N  members 
and  the  second  containing  less  than  2KN  members  (where  R is  the 
logarithm  of  the  number  of  different  symbols)  and  having  a total 
probability  less  than  p.  As  N increases  y and  p approach  zero. 
The  number  of  signals  of  duration  T in  the  channel  is  greater 
than  2{C~e)r  with  6 small  when  T is  large.  If  we  choose 


T = 


N 


then  there  will  be  a sufficient  number  of  sequences  of  channel 
symbols  for  the  high  probability  group  when  N and  T are  suffi- 
ciently large  (however  small  A)  and  also  some  additional  ones. 
The  high  probability  group  is  coded  in  an  arbitrary  one-to-one 
way  into  this  set.  The  remaining  sequences  are  represented  by 
larger  sequences,  starting  and  ending  with  one  of  the  sequences 
not  used  for  the  high  probability  group.  This  special  sequence 
acts  as  a start  and  stop  signal  for  a different  code.  In  between  a 
sufficient  time  is  allowed  to  give  enough  different  sequences  for 
all  the  low  probability  messages.  This  will  require 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


where  <p  is  small.  The  mean  rate  of  transmission  in  message  sym- 
bols per  second  will  then  be  greater  than 

0 "*>  -r +{ ■£■]"  - 0 ■ (-f-+x)+*  (-f+0]’1- 

As  N inlcreases  5,  X and  <p  approach  zero  and  the  rate  approaches 
C 

H • 

Another  method  of  performing  this  coding  and  thereby  prov- 
ing the  theorem  can  be  described  as  follows:  Arrange  the  mes- 
sages of  length  N in  order  of  decreasing  probability  and  suppose 

s-l 

their  probabilities  are  pi  > p2  > pz  • • • > p„.  Let  Ps  = 2-^pi) 

that  is  Pt  is  the  cumulative  probability  up  to,  but  not  including, 
ps.  We  first  encode  into  a binary  system.  The  binary  code  for 
message  s is  obtained  by  expanding  Ps  as  a binary  number.  The 
expansion  is  carried  out  to  ma  places,  where  m8  is  the  integer 
satisfying : 

log2  — < mg  < 1 + log2  1 . 

Ps 

Thus  the  messages  of  high  probability  are  represented  by  short 
codes  and  those  of  low  probability  by  long  codes.  From  these 
inequalities  we  have 

_J_ < „ <_i_ 

2m.  — V*  ^ 2m*“1  ’ 

The  code  for  Pa  will  differ  from  all  succeeding  ones  in  one  or 

more  of  its  ma  places,  since  all  the  remaining  Pi  are  at  least  - 

larger  and  their  binary  expansions  therefore  differ  in  the  first 
ma  places.  Consequently  all  the  codes  are  different  and  it  is 
possible  to  recover  the  message  from  its  code.  If  the  channel 
sequences  are  not  already  sequences  of  binary  digits,  they  can 
be  ascribed  binary  numbers  in  an  arbitrary  fashion  and  the 
binary  code  thus  translated  into  signals  suitable  for  the  channel. 

The  average  number  Hi  of  binary  digits  used  per  symbol  of 
original  message  is  easily  estimated.  We  have 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




But, 


2m,p,. 



N 


2m,p, 


s (i  + log,  j_) 


P® 


and  therefore, 


Gn  < Hi  < Gn  + 



N ' 


As  N increases  Gn  approaches  H , the  entropy  of  the  source  and 
H i approaches  H. 

We  see  from  this  that  the  inefficiency  in  coding,  when  only 
a finite  delay  of  N symbols  is  used,  need  not  be  greater  than 

-jy-  plus  the  difference  between  the  true  entropy  H and  the 

entropy  GN  calculated  for  sequences  of  length  N.  The  per  cent 
excess  time  needed  over  the  ideal  is  therefore  less  than 


Gn  , 1 

H ^ HN 


- 1. 


This  method  of  encoding  is  substantially  the  same  as  one 
found  independently  by  R.  M.  Fano.9  His  method  is  to  arrange 
the  messages  of  length  N in  order  of  decreasing  probability. 
Divide  this  series  into  two  groups  of  as  nearly  equal  probability 
as  possible.  If  the  message  is  in  the  first  group  its  first  binary 
digit  will  be  0,  otherwise  1.  The  groups  are  similarly  divided 
into  subsets  of  nearly  equal  probability  and  the  particular  sub- 
set determines  the  second  binary  digit.  This  process  is  continued 
until  each  subset  contains  only  one  message.  It  is  easily  seen 
that  apart  from  minor  differences  (generally  in  the  last  digit) 
this  amounts  to  the  same  thing  as  the  arithmetic  process  described 
above. 


10.  Discussion  and  Examples 

In  order  to  obtain  the  maximum  power  transfer  from  a generator 
to  a load,  a transformer  must  in  general  be  introduced  so  that 

9 Technical  Report  No.  65,  The  Research  Laboratory  of  Electronics,  M.I.T., 
March  17,  1949. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


the  generator  as  seen  from  the  load  has  the  load  resistance.  The 
situation  here  is  roughly  analogous.  The  transducer  which  does 
the  encoding  should  match  the  source  to  the  channel  in  a statis- 
tical sense.  The  source  as  seen  from  the  channel  through  the 
transducer  should  have  the  same  statistical  structure  as  the 
source  which  maximizes  the  entropy  in  the  channel.  The  content 
of  Theorem  9 is  that,  although  an  exact  match  is  not  in  general 
possible,  we  can  approximate  it  as  closely  as  desired.  The  ratio 
of  the  actual  rate  of  transmission  to  the  capacity  C may  be  called 
the  efficiency  of  the  coding  system.  This  is  of  course  equal  to  the 
ratio  of  the  actual  entropy  of  the  channel  symbols  to  the  maxi- 
mum possible  entropy. 

In  general,  ideal  or  nearly  ideal  encoding  requires  a long  delay 
in  the  transmitter  and  receiver.  In  the  noiseless  case  which  we 
have  been  considering,  the  main  function  of  this  delay  is  to  allow 
reasonably  good  matching  of  probabilities  to  corresponding 
lengths  of  sequences.  With  a good  code  the  logarithm  of  the 
reciprocal  probability  of  a long  message  must  be  proportional  to 
the  duration  of  the  corresponding  signal,  in  fact 

log  V~x  _ r 
T ° 

must  be  small  for  all  but  a small  fraction  of  the  long  messages. 

If  a source  can  produce  only  one  particular  message  its  entropy 
is  zero,  and  no  channel  is  required.  For  example,  a computing 
machine  set  up  to  calculate  the  successive  digits  of  7 r produces 
a definite  sequence  with  no  chance  element.  No  channel  is  required 
to  “transmit”  this  to  another  point.  One  could  construct  a second 
machine  to  compute  the  same  sequence  at  the  point.  However, 
this  may  be  impractical.  In  such  a case  we  can  choose  to  ignore 
some  or  all  of  the  statistical  knowledge  we  have  of  the  source. 
We  might  consider  the  digits  of  ir  to  be  a random  sequence  in 
that  wtc  construct  a system  capable  of  sending  any  sequence  of 
digits.  In  a similar  way  we  may  choose  to  use  some  of  our 
statistical  knowledge  of  English  in  constructing  a code,  but  not 
all  of  it.  In  such  a case  we  consider  the  source  with  the  maximum 
entropy  subject  to  the  statistical  conditions  we  wish  to  retain. 
The  entropy  of  this  source  determines  the  channel  capacity 
which  is  necessary  and  sufficient.  In  the  7 r example  the  only  infor- 


Discrete  Noiseless  Systems 




mation  retained  is  that  all  the  digits  are  chosen  from  the  set 
0,  1,  • • • , 9.  In  the  case  of  English  one  might  wish  to  use  the 
statistical  saving  possible  due  to  letter  frequencies,  but  nothing 
else.  The  maximum  entropy  source  is  then  the  first  approximation 
to  English  and  its  entropy  determines  the  required  channel 
capacity. 

As  a simple  example  of  some  of  these  results  consider  a source 
which  produces  a sequence  of  letters  chosen  from  among  A,  B,  C, 
D with  probabilities  f,  successive  symbols  being  chosen 
independently.  We  have 

H = - (|  log  | + 1 log  1 + f log  |) 

= | bits  per  symbol. 

Thus  we  can  approximate  a coding  system  to  encode  messages 
from  this  source  into  binary  digits  with  an  average  of  \ binary 
digit  per  symbol.  In  this  case  we  can  actually  achieve  the  limiting 
value  by  the  following  code  (obtained  by  the  method  of  the 
second  proof  of  Theorem  9) : 

A 0 

B 10 

C 110 

D 111 

The  average  number  of  binary  digits  used  in  encoding  a sequence 
of  N symbols  will  be 

lV(|Xl+lX2-f|X3)  = l N. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  the  binary  digits  0,  1 have  probabilities 

| so  the  H for  the  coded  sequences  is  one  bit  per  symbol. 

Since,  on  the  average,  we  have  \ binary  symbols  per  original 
letter,  the  entropies  on  a time  basis  are  the  same.  The  maxi- 
mum possible  entropy  for  the  original  set  is  log  4 = 2,  occurring 
when  A,  B,  C,  D have  probabilities  Hence  the  relative 

entropy  is  £.  We  can  translate  the  binary  sequences  into  the 
original  set  of  symbols  on  a two-to-one  basis  by  the  following 
table : 

00  A' 

01  B' 

10  C' 

11  D' 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


This  double  process  then  encodes  the  original  message  into  the 
same  symbols  but  with  an  average  compression  ratio  £. 

As  a second  example  consider  a source  which  produces  a se- 
quence of  A’s  and  B’s  with  probability  p for  A and  q for  B. 
If  p < < q we  have 

H = — logpp(l  — p)l~p 
— — p log  p(l  — 

= V log 

In  such  a case  one  can  construct  a fairly  good  coding  of  the 
message  on  a 0,  1 channel  by  sending  a special  sequence,  say 
0000,  for  the  infrequent  symbol  A and  then  a sequence  indicating 
the  number  of  B’s  following  it.  This  could  be  indicated  by  the 
binary  representation  with  all  numbers  containing  the  special 
sequence  deleted.  All  numbers  up  to  16  are  represented  as  usual; 
16  is  represented  by  the  next  binary  number  after  16  which  does 
not  contain  four  zeros,  namely  17  = 10001,  etc. 

It  can  be  shown  that  as  p — > 0 the  coding  approaches  ideal 
provided  the  length  of  the  special  sequence  is  properly  adjusted. 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 


11.  Representation  of  a Noisy  Discrete  Channel 

We  now  consider  the  case  where  the  signal  is  perturbed  by  noise 
during  transmission  or  at  one  or  the  other  of  the  terminals.  This 
means  that  the  received  signal  is  not  necessarily  the  same  as  that 
sent  out  by  the  transmitter.  Two  cases  may  be  distinguished.  If 
a particular  transmitted  signal  always  produces  the  same  re- 
ceived signal,  i.e.,  the  received  signal  is  a definite  function  of 
the  transmitted  signal,  then  the  effect  may  be  called  distortion. 
If  this  function  has  an  inverse  — no  two  transmitted  signals 
producing  the  same  received  signal  — distortion  may  be  cor- 
rected, at  least  in  principle,  by  merely  performing  the  inverse 
functional  operation  on  the  received  signal. 

The  case  of  interest  here  is  that  in  which  the  signal  does  not 
always  undergo  the  same  change  in  transmission.  In  this  case  we 
may  assume  the  received  signal  E to  be  a function  of  the  trans- 
mitted signal  S and  a second  variable,  the  noise  N. 

E = f(S,N ) 

The  noise  is  considered  to  be  a chance  variable  just  as  the  mes- 
sage was  above.  In  general  it  may  be  represented  by  a suitable 
stochastic  process.  The  most  general  type  of  noisy  discrete  chan- 
nel we  shall  consider  is  a generalization  of  the  finite  state  noise- 
free  channel  described  previously.  We  assume  a finite  number  of 
states  and  a set  of  probabilities 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


This  is  the  probability,  if  the  channel  is  in  state  a and  symbol  i 
is  transmitted,  that  symbol  j will  be  received  and  the  channel 
left  in  state  /?.  Thus  a and  (3  range  over  the  possible  states,  i over 
the  possible  transmitted  signals  and  j over  the  possible  received 
signals.  In  the  case  where  successive  symbols  are  independently 
perturbed  by  the  noise  there  is  only  one  state,  and  the  channel  is 
described  by  the  set  of  transition  probabilities  Pi(j) , the  prob- 
ability of  transmitted  symbol  i being  received  as  j. 

If  a noisy  channel  is  fed  by  a source  there  are  two  statistical 
processes  at  work:  the  source  and  the  noise.  Thus  there  are  a 
number  of  entropies  that  can  be  calculated.  First  there  is  the 
entropy  H (x)  of  the  source  or  of  the  input  to  the  channel  (these 
will  be  equal  if  the  transmitter  is  non-singular).  The  entropy  of 
the  output  of  the  channel,  i.e.,  the  received  signal,  will  be  denoted 
by  H{y).  In  the  noiseless  case  H(y ) = H(x).  The  joint  entropy 
of  input  and  output  will  be  H{x,y).  Finally  there  are  two  condi- 
tional entropies  Hx(y ) and  Hy(x),  the  entropy  of  the  output 
when  the  input  is  known  and  conversely.  Among  these  quantities 
we  have  the  relations 

H(x,y)  = H{x)  + Hx(y)  = H(y)  + Hv{x). 

All  of  these  entropies  can  be  measured  on  a per-second  or  a per- 
symbol  basis. 


12.  Equivocation  and  Channel  Capacity 

If  the  channel  is  noisy  it  is  not  in  general  possible  to  reconstruct 
the  original  message  or  the  transmitted  signal  with  certainty  by 
any  operation  on  the  received  signal  E.  There  are,  however,  ways 
of  transmitting  the  information  which  are  optimal  in  combating 
noise.  This  is  the  problem  which  we  now  consider. 

Suppose  there  are  two  possible  symbols  0 and  1,  and  we  are 
transmitting  at  a rate  of  1000  symbols  per  second  with  probabili- 
ties p0  — Pi  — Thus  our  source  is  producing  information  at  the 
rate  of  1000  bits  per  second.  Puring  transmission  the  noise  intro- 
duces errors  so  that,  on  the  average,  1 in  100  is  received  incor- 
rectly (a  0 as  1,  or  1 as  0).  What  is  the  rate  of  transmission  of 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




information?  Certainly  less  than  1000  bits  per  second  since  about 
1%  of  the  received  symbols  are  incorrect.  Our  first  impulse  might 
be  to  say  the  rate  is  990  bits  per  second,  merely  subtracting  the 
expected  number  of  errors.  This  is  not  satisfactory  since  it  fails 
to  take  into  account  the  recipient’s  lack  of  knowledge  of  where 
the  errors  occur.  We  may  carry  it  to  an  extreme  case  and  suppose 
the  noise  so  great  that  the  received  symbols  are  entirely  inde- 
pendent of  the  transmitted  symbols.  The  probability  of  receiving 
1 is  | whatever  was  transmitted  and  similarly  for  0.  Then  about 
half  of  the  received  symbols  are  correct  due  to  chance  alone,  and 
we  would  be  giving  the  system  credit  for  transmitting  500  bits 
per  second  while  actually  no  information  is  being  transmitted  at 
all.  Equally  “good”  transmission  would  be  obtained  by  dispensing 
with  the  channel  entirely  and  flipping  a coin  at  the  receiving 
point. 

Evidently  the  proper  correction  to  apply  to  the  amount  of  in- 
formation transmitted  is  the  amount  of  this  information  which  is 
missing  in  the  received  signal,  or  alternatively  the  uncertainty 
when  we  have  received  a signal  of  wfliat  was  actually  sent.  From 
our  previous  discussion  of  entropy  as  a measure  of  uncertainty  it 
seems  reasonable  to  use  the  conditional  entropy  of  the  message, 
knowing  the  received  signal,  as  a measure  of  this  missing  infor- 
mation. This  is  indeed  the  proper  definition,  as  we  shall  see  later. 
Following  this  idea  the  rate  of  actual  transmission,  R,  would  be 
obtained  by  subtracting  from  the  rate  of  production  (i.e.,  the 
entropy  of  the  source)  the  average  rate  of  conditional  entropy. 

R = H(x)  - Hy(x) 

The  conditional  entropy  Hy(x ) will,  for  convenience,  be  called 
the  equivocation.  It  measures  the  average  ambiguity  of  the  re- 
ceived signal. 

In  the  example  considered  above,  if  a 0 is  received  the  a 'poste- 
riori probability  that  a 0 was  transmitted  is  .99,  and  that  a 1 was 
transmitted  is  .01.  These  figures  are  reversed  if  a 1 is  received. 
Hence 

Hy(x ) = — [.99  log  .99  + 0.01  log  0.01] 

= .081  bits/symbol 

or  81  bits  per  second.  We  may  say  that  the  system  is  transmitting 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


at/  a rate  1000  — 81  = 919  bits  per  second.  In  the  extreme  case 
where  a 0 is  equally  likely  to  be  received  as  a 0 or  1 and  similarly 
for  1,  the  a 'posteriori  probabilities  are  \ and 

H,(x)  = - [i  log  i + i log  i] 

= 1 bit  per  symbol 

or  1000  bits  per  second.  The  rate  of  transmission  is  then  0 as  it 
should  be. 

The  following  theorem  gives  a direct  intuitive  interpretation  of 
the  equivocation  and  also  serves  to  justify  it  as  the  unique  appro- 
priate measure.  We  consider  a communication  system  and  an 
observer  (or  auxiliary  device)  who  can  see  both  what  is  sent  and 
what  is  recovered  (with  errors  due  to  noise) . This  observer  notes 
the  errors  in  the  recovered  message  and  transmits  data  to  the 
receiving  point  over  a “correction  channel”  to  enable  the  receiver 
to  correct  the  errors.  The  situation  is  indicated  schematically  in 
Fig.  8. 


CORRECTION  DATA 


SOURCE  TRANSMITTER  RECEIVER  CORRECTING 

DEVICE 


Fig.  8.  — Schematic  diagram  of  a correction  system. 


Theorem  10:  If  the  correction  channel  has  a capacity  equal  to 
Hy(x)  it  is  possible  to  so  encode  the  correction  data  as  to  send  it 
over  this  channel  and  correct  all  but  an  arbitrarily  small  fraction 
€ of  the  errors.  This  is  not  possible  if  the  channel  capacity  is  less 
than  Hy(x) . 

Roughly  then,  Hy(x)  is  the  amount  of  additional  information 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




that  must  be  supplied  per  second  at  the  receiving  point  to  correct 
the  received  message. 

To  prove  the  first  part,  consider  long  sequences  of  received 
message  M ' and  corresponding  original  message  M.  There  will  be 
logarithmically  THV  (z)  of  the  M’s  which  could  reasonably  have 
produced  each  M'.  Thus  we  have  THy(x ) binary  digits  to  send 
each  T seconds.  This  can  be  done  with  e frequency  of  errors  on  a 
channel  of  capacity  Hy(x). 

The  second  part  can  be  proved  by  noting,  first,  that  for  any 
discrete  chance  variables  x,  y,  z 

Hy  (r,  2)  ^ Hy  (r) . 

The  left-hand  side  can  be  expanded  to  give 

Hy(z)  + Hyz(x)  > Hv(x ) 

Hyz(x)  >Hy(x ) - Hy(z)  >Hy(x)  — H(z). 

If  we  identify  x as  the  output  of  the  source,  y as  the  received 
signal  and  z as  the  signal  sent  over  the  correction  channel,  then 
the  right-hand  side  is  the  equivocation  less  the  rate  of  transmis- 
sion over  the  correction  channel.  If  the  capacity  of  this  channel 
is  less  than  the  equivocation  the  right-hand  side  will  be  greater 
than  zero  and  Hyz{x ) > 0.  But  this  is  the  uncertainty  of  what 
was  sent,  knowing  both  the  received  signal  and  the  correction 
signal.  If  this  is  greater  than  zero  the  frequency  of  errors  cannot 
be  arbitrarily  small. 

Example: 

Suppose  the  errors  occur  at  random  in  a sequence  of  binary  digits: 
probability  p that  a digit  is  wrong  and  q = 1 — p that  it  is  right. 
These  errors  can  be  corrected  if  their  position  is  known.  Thus  the 
correction  channel  need  only  send  information  as  to  these  positions. 
This  amounts  to  transmitting  from  a source  which  produces  binary 
digits  with  probability  p for  1 (incorrect)  and  q for  0 (correct).  This 
requires  a channel  of  capacity 

— [p  log  p + q log  q ] 

which  is  the  equivocation  of  the  original  system. 

The  rate  of  transmission  R can  be  written  in  two  other  forms 
due  to  the  identities  noted  above.  We  have 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


R = H(x)  - Hy(x) 

= H(y)  — Hx(y) 

= H(x)  +H{y)  — H (x,  y). 

The  first  defining  expression  has  already  been  interpreted  as  the 
amount  of  information  sent  less  the  uncertainty  of  what  was  sent. 
The  second  measures  the  amount  received  less  the  part  of  this 
which  is  due  to  noise.  The  third  is  the  sum  of  the  two  amounts 
less  the  joint  entropy  and  therefore  in  a sense  is  the  number  of 
bits  per  second  common  to  the  two.  Thus  all  three  expressions 
have  a certain  intuitive  significance. 

The  capacity  C of  a noisy  channel  should  be  the  maximum  pos- 
sible rate  of  transmission,  i.e.,  the  rate  when  the  source  is  properly 
matched  to  the  channel.  We  therefore  define  the  channel  ca- 
pacity by 

C = Max  ( H(x ) - Hy{x )) 

where  the  maximum  is  with  respect  to  all  possible  information 
sources  used  as  input  to  the  channel.  If  the  channel  is  noiseless, 
Hy(x)  = 0.  The  definition  is  then  equivalent  to  that  already 
given  for  a noiseless  channel  since  the  maximum  entropy  for  the 
channel  is  its  capacity  by  Theorem  8. 


13.  The  Fundamental  Theorem  for  a Discrete  Channel 
with  Noise 

It  may  seem  surprising  that  we  should  define  a definite  ca- 
pacity C for  a noisy  channel  since  we  can  never  send  certain 
information  in  such  a case.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  by  sending 
the  information  in  a redundant  form  the  probability  of  errors  can 
be  reduced.  For  example,  by  repeating  the  message  many  times 
and  by  a statistical  study  of  the  different  received  versions  of  the 
message  the  probability  of  errors  could  be  made  very  small.  One 
would  expect,  however,  that  to  make  this  probability  of  errors 
approach  zero,  the  redundancy  of  the  encoding  must  increase 
indefinitely,  and  the  rate  of  transmission  therefore  approach  zero. 
This  is  by  no  means  true.  If  it  were,  there  would  not  be  a very 
well  defined  capacity,  but  only  a capacity  for  a given  frequency 
of  errors,  or  a given  equivocation;  the  capacity  going  down  as  the 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




error  requirements  are  made  more  stringent.  Actually  the  ca- 
pacity C defined  above  has  a very  definite  significance.  It  is  pos- 
sible to  send  information  at  the  rate  C through  the  channel  with 
as  small  a frequency  of  errors  or  equivocation  as  desired  by 
proper  encoding.  This  statement  is  not  true  for  any  rate  greater 
than  C.  If  an  attempt  is  made  to  transmit  at  a higher  rate  than  C, 
say  C + Ri,  then  there  will  necessarily  be  an  equivocation  equal 
to  or  greater  than  the  excess  R i.  Nature  takes  payment  by  re- 
quiring just  that  much  uncertainty,  so  that  we  are  not  actually 
getting  any  more  than  C through  correctly. 

The  situation  is  indicated  in  Fig.  9.  The  rate  of  information  into 
the  channel  is  plotted  horizontally  and  the  equivocation  verti- 
cally. Any  point  above  the  heavy  line  in  the  shaded  region  can 
be  attained  and  those  below  cannot.  The  points  on  the  line  cannot 
in  general  be  attained,  but  there  will  usually  be  two  points  on  the 
line  that  can. 

These  results  are  the  main  justification  for  the  definition  of  C 
and  will  now  be  proved. 

Theorem  11:  Let  a discrete  channel  have  the  capacity  C and 
a discrete  source  the  entropy  per  second  H.  If  H < C there  exists 
a coding  system  such  that  the  output  of  the  source  can  be  trans- 
mitted over  the  channel  with  an  arbitrarily  small  frequency  of 
errors  (or  an  arbitrarily  small  equivocation).  If  H > C it  is  pos- 
sible to  encode  the  source  so  that  the  equivocation  is  less  than 
H — C + e where  e is  arbitrarily  small.  There  is  no  method  of 
encoding  which  gives  an  equivocation  less  than  H — C. 

The  method  of  proving  the  first  part  of  this  theorem  is  not  by 
exhibiting  a coding  method  having  the  desired  properties,  but  by 
showing  that  such  a code  must  exist  in  a certain  group  of  codes. 


Fig.  9.  — The  equivocation  possible  for  a given  input  entropy  to  a channel. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


In  fact  we  will  average  the  frequency  of  errors  over  this  group 
and  show  that  this  average  can  be  made  less  than  e.  If  the  average 
of  a set  of  numbers  is  less  than  e there  must  exist  at  least  one  in 
the  set  which  is  less  than  e.  This  will  establish  the  desired  result. 

The  capacity  C of  a noisy  channel  has  been  defined  as 

C = Max  (H(x)  - Hy(x )) 

where  x is  the  input  and  y the  output.  The  maximization  is  over 
all  sources  which  might  be  used  as  input  to  the  channel. 

Let  So  be  a source  which  achieves  the  maximum  capacity  C. 
If  this  maximum  is  not  actually  achieved  by  any  source  (but 
only  approached  as  a limit)  let  S0  be  a source  which  approximates 
to  giving  the  maximum  rate.  Suppose  S0  is  used  as  input  to  the 
channel.  We  consider  the  possible  transmitted  and  received  se- 
quences of  a long  duration  T.  The  following  will  be  true: 

1.  The  transmitted  sequences  fall  into  two  classes,  a high  prob- 
ability group  with  about  2th  (x)  members  and  the  remaining  se- 
quences of  small  total  probability. 

2.  Similarly  the  received  sequences  have  a high  probability  set 
of  about  2th  (v)  members  and  a low  probability  set  of  remaining 
sequences. 

3.  Each  high  probability  output  could  be  produced  by  about 
2 *’"»(*)  inputs.  The  total  probability  of  all  other  cases  is  small. 

4.  Each  high  probability  input  could  result  in  about  2TH*(X) 
outputs.  The  total  probability  of  all  other  results  is  small. 

All  the  c’s  and  8’s  implied  by  the  words  “small”  and  “about”  in 
these  statements  approach  zero  as  we  allow  T to  increase  and  S0 
to  approach  the  maximizing  source. 

The  situation  is  summarized  in  Fig.  10  where  the  input  se- 
quences are  points  on  the  left  and  output  sequences  points  on  the 
right.  The  upper  fan  of  cross  lines  represents  the  range  of  possible 
causes  for  a typical  output.  The  lower  fan  represents  the  range  of 
possible  results  from  a typical  input.  In  both  cases  the  “small 
probability”  sets  are  ignored. 

Now  suppose  we  have  another  source  S,  producing  information 
at  rate  R with  R < C.  In  the  period  T this  source  will  have  2TR 
high  probability  messages.  We  wish  to  associate  these  with  a 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




E 


M 


HIGH  PROBABILITY 
RECEIVED  SIGNALS 


• REASONABLE  EFFECTS  • 
FROM  EACH  M * 


Fig.  10.  — Schematic  representation  of  the  relations  between  inputs  and  outputs 
in  a channel. 


selection  of  the  possible  channel  inputs  in  such  a way  as  to  get  a 
small  frequency  of  errors.  We  will  set  up  this  association  in  all 
possible  ways  (using,  however,  only  the  high  probability  group  of 
inputs  as  determined  by  the  source  S0 ) and  average  the  frequency 
of  errors  for  this  large  class  of  possible  coding  systems.  This  is  the 
same  as  calculating  the  frequency  of  errors  for  a random  associa- 
tion of  the  messages  and  channel  inputs  of  duration  T.  Suppose  a 
particular  output  yx  is  observed.  What  is  the  probability  of  more 
than  one  message  from  S,  in  the  set  of  possible  causes  of  1/1? 
There  are  2TR  messages  distributed  at  random  in  2th {x)  points. 
The  probability  of  a particular  point  being  a message  is  thus 

<)T(R-H  ( x )) 

The  probability  that  none  of  the  points  in  the  fan  is  a message 
(apart  from  the  actual  originating  message)  is 

p — [l  _ 2r(«-ff(s»]2rV*)> 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


n 


Now  R < H{x)  — Hy{x ) so  R — H(x)  = — Hy(x ) — y with  y 
positive.  Consequently 

p — _ 2-rHv(x)-r>7j27’/fj/w 

approaches  (as  T— » oo) 

1 - 2~Tv. 

Hence  the  probability  of  an  error  approaches  zero  and  the  first 
part  of  the  theorem  is  proved. 

The  second  part  of  the  theorem  is  easily  shown  by  noting  that 
we  could  merely  send  C bits  per  second  from  the  source,  com- 
pletely neglecting  the  remainder  of  the  information  generated.  At 
the  receiver  the  neglected  part  gives  an  equivocation  H(x)  — C 
and  the  part  transmitted  need  only  add  c.  This  limit  can  also  be 
attained  in  many  other  ways,  as  will  be  shown  when  we  consider 
the  continuous  case. 

The  last  statement  of  the  theorem  is  a simple  consequence  of 
our  definition  of  C.  Suppose  we  can  encode  a source  with  H(x)  = 
C + a in  such  a way  as  to  obtain  an  equivocation  Hy(x ) = a — e 
with  c positive.  Then 

H(x)  - Hy(x)  = C + £ 

with  € positive.  This  contradicts  the  definition  of  C as  the  maxi- 
mum of  H(x)  — Hy(x). 

Actually  more  has  been  proved  than  was  stated  in  the  theorem. 
If  the  average  of  a set  of  positive  numbers  is  within  e of  zero,  a 

fraction  of  at  most  V e can  have  values  greater  than  \/T.  Since 
e is  arbitrarily  small  we  can  say  that  almost  all  the  systems  are 
arbitrarily  close  to  the  ideal. 


14.  Discussion 

The  demonstration  of  Theorem  11,  while  not  a pure  existence 
proof,  has  some  of  the  deficiencies  of  such  proofs.  An  attempt  to 
obtain  a good  approximation  to  ideal  coding  by  following  the 
method  of  the  proof  is  generally  impractical.  In  fact,  apart  from 
some  rather  trivial  cases  and  certain  limiting  situations,  no  ex- 
plicit description  of  a series  of  approximation  to  the  ideal  has 
been  found.  Probably  this  is  no  accident  but  is  related  to  the 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




difficulty  of  giving  an  explicit  construction  for  a good  approxima- 
tion to  a random  sequence. 

An  approximation  to  the  ideal  would  have  the  property  that  if 
the  signal  is  altered  in  a reasonable  way  by  the  noise,  the  original 
can  still  be  recovered.  In  other  words  the  alteration  will  not  in 
general  bring  it  closer  to  another  reasonable  signal  than  the  orig- 
inal. This  is  accomplished  at  the  cost  of  a certain  amount  of 
redundancy  in  the  coding.  The  redundancy  must  be  introduced 
in  the  proper  way  to  combat  the  particular  noise  structure  in- 
volved. However,  any  redundancy  in  the  source  will  usually  help 
if  it  is  utilized  at  the  receiving  point.  In  particular,  if  the  source 
already  has  a certain  redundancy  and  no  attempt  is  made  to 
eliminate  it  in  matching  to  the  channel,  this  redundancy  will  help 
combat  noise.  For  example,  in  a noiseless  telegraph  channel  one 
could  save  about  50%  in  time  by  proper  encoding  of  the  mes- 
sages. This  is  not  done  and  most  of  the  redundancy  of  English 
remains  in  the  channel  symbols.  This  has  the  advantage,  how- 
ever, of  allowing  considerable  noise  in  the  channel.  A sizable 
fraction  of  the  letters  can  be  received  incorrectly  and  still  recon- 
structed by  the  context.  In  fact  this  is  probably  not  a bad  approx- 
imation to  the  ideal  in  many  cases,  since  the  statistical  structure 
of  English  is  rather  involved  and  the  reasonable  English  se- 
quences are  not  too  far  (in  the  sense  required  for  theorem)  from 
a random  selection. 

As  in  the  noiseless  case  a delay  is  generally  required  to  ap- 
proach the  ideal  encoding.  It  now  has  the  additional  function  of 
allowing  a large  sample  of  noise  to  affect  the  signal  before  any 
judgment  is  made  at  the  receiving  point  as  to  the  original  mes- 
sage. Increasing  the  sample  size  always  sharpens  the  possible 
statistical  assertions. 

The  content  of  Theorem  11  and  its  proof  can  be  formulated  in 
a somewhat  different  way  which  exhibits  the  connection  with  the 
noiseless  case  more  clearly.  Consider  the  possible  signals  of  dura- 
tion T and  suppose  a subset  of  them  is  selected  to  be  used.  Let 
those  in  the  subset  all  be  used  with  equal  probability,  and  suppose 
the  receiver  is  constructed  to  select,  as  the  original  signal,  the 
most  probable  cause  from  the  subset,  when  a perturbed  signal  is 
received.  We  define  N(T,  q)  to  be  the  maximum  number  of  sig- 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


nals  we  can  choose  for  the  subset  such  that  the  probability  of  an 
incorrect  interpretation  is  less  than  or  equal  to  q. 


Theorem  12:  Lim 

T-*  oo 


log  N(T,  q) 
T 


= C , where  C is  the  channel  ca- 


pacity, provided  that  q does  not  equal  0 or  1. 

In  other  words,  no  matter  how  we  set  our  limits  of  reliability, 
we  can  distinguish  reliably  in  time  T enough  messages  to  corre- 
spond to  about  CT  bits,  when  T is  sufficiently  large.  Theorem  12 
can  be  compared  with  the  definition  of  the  capacity  of  a noiseless 
channel  given  in  section  1. 


15.  Example  of  a Discrete  Channel  and  Its  Capacity 

A simple  example  of  a discrete  channel  is  indicated  in  Fig.  11. 
There  are  three  possible  symbols.  The  first  is  never  affected  by 
noise.  The  second  and  third  each  have  probability  p of  coming 
through  undisturbed,  and  q of  being  changed  into  the  other  of  the 

• >»  • 


Fig.  11.  — Example  of  a discrete  channel. 


pair.  Let  a = — [p  log  p + q log  q]  and  let  P,  Q and  Q be  the 
probabilities  of  using  the  first,  second  and  third  symbols  respec- 
tively (the  last  two  being  equal  from  consideration  of  symmetry) . 
We  have: 

H ( x ) = — P log  P — 2Q  log  Q 
Hv(x ) = 2 Qa. 

We  wish  to  choose  P and  Q in  such  a way  as  to  maximize 
H(x ) — Hy(x),  subject  to  the  constraint  P + 2Q  = 1.  Hence  we 
consider 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




U = -P  log  P - 2 Q log  Q - 2Qa  + A(P  + 2Q) 
dU 


dP 

dU 


dQ 


= — 1 — log  P + X = 0 
= - 2 - 2 log  Q - 2a  + 2X  = 0. 


Eliminating  X 


P = 


P 


P + 2 

The  channel  capacity  is  then 

C = log 


log  f - log  Q + a 
P = Qe«  = Qp 

Q = 


P + 2 


P + 2 
P 


Note  how  this  checks  the  obvious  values  in  the  cases  p — 1 and 
p = + In  the  first,  p = 1 and  C = log  3,  which  is  correct  since 
the  channel  is  then  noiseless  with  three  possible  symbols.  If  p = 
ft  = 2 and  C = log  2.  Here  the  second  and  third  symbols  can- 
not be  distinguished  at  all  and  act  together  like  one  symbol.  The 
first  symbol  is  used  with  probability  P = \ and  the  second  and 
third  together  with  probability  This  may  be  distributed  be- 
tween them  in  any  desired  way  and  still  achieve  the  maximum 
capacity. 

For  intermediate  values  of  p the  channel  capacity  will  lie  be- 
tween log  2 and  log  3.  The  distinction  between  the  second  and 
third  symbols  conveys  some  information  but  not  as  much  as  in 
the  noiseless  case.  The  first  symbol  is  used  somewhat  more  fre- 
quently than  the  other  two  because  of  its  freedom  from  noise. 


16.  The  Channel  Capacity  in  Certain  Special  Cases 

If  the  noise  affects  successive  channel  symbols  independently  it 
can  be  described  by  a set  of  transition  probabilities  pa.  This  is 
the  probability,  if  symbol  i is  sent,  that  j will  be  received.  The 
channel  capacity  is  then  given  by  the  maximum  of 

— 2-jPiPa  logl^PiPu  + l^PiPa  log  pa 

it  j i i,i 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


where  we  vary  the  Pi  subject  to  2P*  = 1.  This  leads  by  the 
method  of  Lagrange  to  the  equations, 

llpsj  log  — — 1 — = m s = 1,  2,  • • • . 

P iPij 
i 

Multiplying  by  P$  and  summing  on  5 shows  that  —C.  Let 
the  inverse  of  pSj  (if  it  exists)  be  hst  so  that = 5*,-.  Then: 


2^hstp8j  log  psj  — log  2-/  PiPu  = — C 

8 , j i 8 

Hence: 

E PiPu  = exp  [cZ/isi  + lLhstpsj  log  ps 3] 

i 8 8,] 

or, 

Pi  = 2 hu  exp  [cE/i#i  + ^2hstpsj  log  pSj]. 

t 8 8,] 

This  is  the  system  of  equations  for  determining  the  maximizing 
values  of  Pi,  with  C to  be  determined  so  that  2Pi  = 1.  When  this 
is  done  C will  be  the  channel  capacity,  and  the  Pi  the  proper 
probabilities  for  the  channel  symbols  to  achieve  this  capacity. 

If  each  input  symbol  has  the  same  set  of  probabilities  on  the 
lines  emerging  from  it,  and  the  same  is  true  of  each  output  sym- 


V2  '/i 


Fig.  12.  — Examples  of  discrete  channels  with  the  same  transition  probabilities 
for  each  input  and  for  each  output. 


bol,  the  capacity  can  be  easily  calculated.  Hixamples  are  shown  in 
Fig.  12.  In  such  a case  Hx(y ) is  independent  of  the  distribution  of 


The  Discrete  Channel  with  Noise 




probabilities  on  the  input  symbols,  and  is  given  by  — X pi  log  p\ 
where  the  pi  are  the  values  of  the  transition  probabilities  from 
any  input  symbol.  The  channel  capacity  is 

Max  [H(y)  - Hx{y)} 

= Max  H(y)  + X pt  log  Pi. 

The  maximum  of  H (y)  is  clearly  log  m where  m is  the  number  of 
output  symbols,  since  it  is  possible  to  make  them  all  equally 
probable  by  making  the  input  symbols  equally  probable.  The 
channel  capacity  is  therefore 

C = log  m + X pt  log  Pi. 

In  Fig.  12a  it  would  be 

C = log  4 — log  2 = log  2. 

This  could  be  achieved  by  using  only  the  1st  and  3d  symbols.  In 
Fig.  12b 

C = log  4 — | log  3 — | log  6 
= log  4 — log  3 — \ log  2 

= log  7 2f. 

In  Fig.  12c  we  have 

C = log  3 — j log  2 — } log  3 — } log  6 


= log 


2*  3*  6*  ’ 


Suppose  the  symbols  fall  into  several  groups  such  that  the  noise 
never  causes  a symbol  in  one  group  to  be  mistaken  for  a symbol 
in  another  group.  Let  the  capacity  for  the  nth  group  be  Cn  (in 
bits  per  second)  when  we  use  only  the  symbols  in  this  group. 
Then  it  is  easily  shown  that,  for  best  use  of  the  entire  set,  the 
total  probability  Pn  of  all  symbols  in  the  nth  group  should  be 


Pn  = 


2C» 
22c»  * 


Within  a group  the  probability  is  distributed  just  as  it  would  be 
if  these  were  the  only  symbols  being  used.  The  channel  capacity  is 

C = log  22c». 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


17.  An  Example  of  Efficient  Coding 

The  following  example,  although  somewhat  artificial,  is  a case  in 
which  exact  matching  to  a noisy  channel  is  possible.  There  are 
two  channel  symbols,  0 and  1,  and  the  noise  affects  them  in  blocks 
of  seven  symbols.  A block  of  seven  is  either  transmitted  without 
error,  or  exactly  one  symbol  of  the  seven  is  incorrect.  These  eight 
possibilities  are  equally  likely.  We  have 

C = Max  [H(y)  - Hx(y )] 

= y [7  + 1 log  7] 

= y bits/symbol. 

An  efficient  code,  allowing  complete  correction  of  errors  and 
transmitting  at  the  rate  C,  is  the  following  (found  by  a method 
due  to  R.  Hamming) : 

Let  a block  of  seven  symbols  be  Xlf  X?,  • • • , X7.  Of  these 
X3,  X5,  X6  and  X7  are  message  symbols  and  chosen  arbitrarily 
by  the  source.  The  other  three  are  redundant  and  calculated  as 
follows: 

X4  is  chosen  to  make  a = X4  + X5  + X6  + X7  even 

X2“  “ “ “ J8  = X2  + X3  + X6  + X7  “ 

Xt  “ “ 11  11  y = x7  + X3  + X5  + X7  “ 

When  a block  of  seven  is  received  a , ft  and  y are  calculated  and 

if  even  called  zero,  if  odd  called  one.  The  binary  number  a (3  y 
then  gives  the  subscript  of  the  X4  that  is  incorrect  (if  0 there 
was  no  error)  .10 

10  For  some  further  examples  of  self-correcting  codes  see  M.  J.  E.  Golay, 
“Notes  on  Digital  Coding,”  Proceedings  of  the  Institute  of  Radio  Engineers, 
v.  37,  No.  6,  June,  1949,  p.  637. 


Ill 

Continuous  Information 


We  now  consider  the  case  where  the  signals  or  the  messages  or 
both  are  continuously  variable,  in  contrast  with  the  discrete 
nature  assumed  heretofore.  To  a considerable  extent  the  con- 
tinuous case  can  be  obtained  through  a limiting  process  from  the 
discrete  case  by  dividing  the  continuum  of  messages  and  signals 
into  a large  but  finite  number  of  small  regions  and  calculating 
the  various  parameters  involved  on  a discrete  basis.  As  the  size 
of  the  regions  is  decreased  these  parameters  in  general  approach 
as  limits  the  proper  values  for  the  continuous  case.  There  are, 
however,  a few  new  effects  that  appear  and  also  a general  change 
of  emphasis  in  the  direction  of  specialization  of  the  general  results 
to  particular  cases. 

We  will  not  attempt,  in  the  continuous  case,  to  obtain  our 
results  with  the  greatest  generality,  or  with  the  extreme  rigor  of 
pure  mathematics,  since  this  would  involve  a great  deal  of  ab- 
stract measure  theory  and  would  obscure  the  main  thread  of  the 
analysis.  A preliminary  study,  however,  indicates  that  the  theory 
can  be  formulated  in  a completely  axiomatic  and  rigorous  manner 
which  includes  both  the  continuous  and  discrete  cases  and  many 
others.  The  occasional  liberties  taken  with  limiting  processes  in 
the  present  analysis  can  be  justified  in  all  cases  of  practical 
interest. 


18.  Sets  and  Ensembles  of  Functions 


We  shall  have  to  deal  in  the  continuous  case  with  sets  of  func- 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


tions  and  ensembles  of  functions.  A set  of  functions,  as  the  name 
implies,  is  merely  a class  or  collection  of  functions,  generally  of 
one  variable,  time.  It  can  be  specified  by  giving  an  explicit  rep- 
resentation of  the  various  functions  in  the  set,  or  implicitly  by 
giving  a property  which  functions  in  the  set  possess  and  others 
do  not.  Some  examples  are : 

1.  The  set  of  functions: 

fe(t)  = sin  (t  + 9). 

Each  particular  value  of  9 determines  a particular  function  in 
the  set. 

2.  The  set  of  all  functions  of  time  containing  no  frequencies  over 
W cycles  per  second. 

3.  The  set  of  all  functions  limited  in  band  to  W and  in  amplitude 
to  A. 

4.  The  set  of  all  English  speech  signals  as  functions  of  time. 

An  ensemble  of  functions  is  a set  of  functions  together  with  a 
probability  measure  whereby  we  may  determine  the  probability 
of  a function  in  the  set  having  certain  properties.1  For  example 
with  the  set, 

f0(t)  = sin  (t  + 0), 

we  may  give  a probability  distribution  for  9 , say  P{9).  The  set 
then  becomes  an  ensemble. 

Some  further  examples  of  ensembles  of  functions  are: 

1.  A finite  set  of  functions  fk(t)  (k  = 1,  2,  • • • , n)  with  the 
probability  of  fk  being  pk. 

2.  A finite  dimensional  family  of  functions 

) " , OCfi  , L) 

with  a probability  distribution  for  the  parameters  cni 

Via i,  ' * ' , «n) • 

For  example  we  could  consider  the  ensemble  defined  by 

n 

f(a i,  • • • , an,  0i,  • • • , 0„;  t)  = 2^an  sin  n(ut  + 9„) 

n=i 

1 In  mathematical  terminology  the  functions  belong  to  a measure  space 
whose  total  measure  is  unity. 


Continuous  Information 




with  the  amplitudes  distributed  normally  and  independ- 
ently, and  the  phases  distributed  uniformly  (from  0 to  2tt) 
and  independently. 

3.  The  ensemble 


/•/  #\ 


AOf,  V 


V sin  7r(2 Wi  — n) 
tt(2 Wt  - n) 


with  the  ai  normal  and  independent  all  with  the  same  standard 


deviation 


V N.  This  is  a representation  of  “white”  noise,  band 


limited  to  the  band  from  0 to  W cycles  per  second  and  with 


average  power  N2 


4. 


Let  points  be  distributed  on  the  t axis  according  to  a Poisson 
distribution.  At  each  selected  point  the  function  f(t)  is  placed 


and  the  different  functions  added,  giving  the  ensemble 


oo 


+ tk) 


where  the  tk  are  the  points  of  the  Poisson  distribution.  This 
ensemble  can  be  considered  as  a type  of  impulse  or  shot  noise 
where  all  the  impulses  are  identical. 

5.  The  set  of  English  speech  functions  with  the  probability  meas- 
ure given  by  the  frequency  of  occurrence  in  ordinary  use. 


An  ensemble  of  functions  /<*(£)  is  stationary  if  the  same  en- 
semble results  when  all  functions  are  shifted  any  fixed  amount 
in  time.  The  ensemble 

fe(t)  — sin  (t  + 8) 


is  stationarv  if  8 is  distributed  uniformlv  from  0 to  2i r.  If  we 


shift  each  function  by  tx  we  obtain 


fe(t  + tx)  — sin  {t  + tx  + 8) 


sin  (t  + <p) 


2 This  representation  can  be  used  as  a definition  of  band  limited  white  noise. 
It  has  certain  advantages  in  that  it  involves  fewer  limiting  operations  than 
do  definitions  that  have  been  used  in  the  past.  The  name  “white  noise,” 
already  firmly  intrenched  in  the  literature,  is  perhaps  somewhat  unfortu- 
nate. In  optics  white  light  means  either  any  continuous  spectrum  as  con- 
trasted with  a point  spectrum,  or  a spectrum  which  is  flat  with  wavelength 
(which  is  not  the  same  as  a spectrum  flat  with  frequency). 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


with  <f>  distributed  uniformly  from  0 to  2i r.  Each  function  has 
changed  but  the  ensemble  as  a whole  is  invariant  under  the  trans- 
lation. The  other  examples  given  above  are  also  stationary. 

An  ensemble  is  ergodic  if  it  is  stationary,  and  there  is  no 
subset  of  the  functions  in  the  set  with  a probability  different 
from  0 and  1 which  is  stationary.  The  ensemble 

sin  (t  + 6) 

is  ergodic.  No  subset  of  these  functions  of  probability  =£  0,  1 is 
transformed  into  itself  under  all  time  translations.  On  the  other 
hand  the  ensemble 

a sin  ( t + 9) 

with  a distributed  normally  and  0 uniform  is  stationary  but  not 
ergodic.  The  subset  of  these  functions  with  a between  0 and  1,  for 
example,  is  stationary,  and  has  a probability  not  equal  to  0 or  1. 

Of  the  examples  given,  3 and  4 are  ergodic,  and  5 may  perhaps 
be  considered  so.  If  an  ensemble  is  ergodic  we  may  say  roughly 
that  each  function  in  the  set  is  typical  of  the  ensemble.  More 
precisely  it  is  known  that  with  an  ergodic  ensemble  an  average 
of  any  statistic  over  the  ensemble  is  equal  (with  probability  1) 
to  an  average  over  all  the  time  translations  of  a particular  func- 
tion in  the  set.3  Roughly  speaking,  each  function  can  be  expected, 
as  time  progresses,  to  go  through,  with  the  proper  frequency,  all 
the  convolutions  of  any  of  the  functions  in  the  set. 

Just  as  we  may  perform  various  operations  on  numbers  or 
functions  to  obtain  new  numbers  or  functions,  we  can  perform 
operations  on  ensembles  to  obtain  new  ensembles.  Suppose,  for 
example,  we  have  an  ensemble  of  functions  fa(t)  and  an  operator 
T which  gives  for  each  function  fa(t)  a resulting  function  ga(t ): 

ga(t)  = Tfa{t) . 

3 This  is  the  famous  ergodic  theorem  or  rather  one  aspect  of  this  theorem 
which  was  proved  in  somewhat  different  formulations  by  Birkhoff,  von 
Neumann,  and  Koopman,  and  subsequently  generalized  by  Wiener,  Hopf, 
Hurewicz  and  others.  The  literature  on  ergodic  theory  is  quite  extensive 
and  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  papers  of  these  writers  for  precise  and 
general  formulations;  e.g.,  E.  Hopf  “Ergodentheorie,”  Ergebnisse  der  Math- 
ematic und  ihrer  Grenzgebiete,  v.  5;  “On  Causality  Statistics  and  Proba- 
bility,” Journal  of  Mathematics  and  Physics,  v.  XIII,  No.  1,  1934;  N. 
Wiener  “The  Ergodic  Theorem,”  Duke  Mathematical  Journal,  v.  5,  1939. 


Continuous  Information 




Probability  measure  is  defined  for  the  set  ga(t)  by  means  of  that 
for  the  set  /«(£)•  The  probability  of  a certain  subset  of  the  ga{t ) 
functions  is  equal  to  that  of  the  subset  of  the  fa(t)  functions 
which  produce  members  of  the  given  subset  of  g functions  under 
the  operation  T.  Physically  this  corresponds  to  passing  the 
ensemble  through  some  device,  for  example,  a filter,  a rectifier 
or  a modulator.  The  output  functions  of  the  device  form  the 
ensemble  ga(t) . 

A device  or  operator  T will  be  called  invariant  if  shifting  the 
input  merely  shifts  the  output,  i.e.,  if 

ga(t)  = Tfa(t) . 

implies 

g*(t  + h)  = Tf a ( t + h) 

for  all  fa{t)  and  all  tr.  It  is  easily  shown  (see  Appendix  5)  that 
if  T is  invariant  and  the  input  ensemble  is  stationary  then  the 
output  ensemble  is  stationary.  Likewise  if  the  input  is  ergodic  the 
output  will  also  be  ergodic. 

A filter  or  a rectifier  is  invariant  under  all  time  translations. 
The  operation  of  modulation  is  not,  since  the  carrier  phase  gives 
a certain  time  structure.  However,  modulation  is  invariant  under 
all  translations  which  are  multiples  of  the  period  of  the  carrier. 

Wiener  has  pointed  out  the  intimate  relation  between  the  in- 
variance of  physical  devices  under  time  translations  and  Fourier 
theory.4  He  has  shown,  in  fact,  that,  if  a device  is  linear  as  well 
as  invariant  Fourier  analysis  is  then  the  appropriate  mathe- 
matical tool  for  dealing  with  the  problem. 

An  ensemble  of  functions  is  the  appropriate  mathematical 
representation  of  the  messages  produced  by  a continuous  source 
(for  example,  speech),  of  the  signals  produced  by  a transmitter, 
and  of  the  perturbing  noise.  Communication  theory  is  properly 

4 Communication  theory  is  heavily  indebted  to  Wiener  for  much  of  its 
basic  philosophy  and  theory.  His  classic  NDRC  report,  The  Interpolation, 
Extrapolation,  and  Smoothing  of  Stationary  Time  Series  (Wiley,  1949), 
contains  the  first  clear-cut  formulation  of  communication  theory  as  a statis- 
tical problem,  the  study  of  operations  on  time  series.  This  work,  although 
chiefly  concerned  with  the  linear  prediction  and  filtering  problem,  is  an 
important  collateral  reference  in  connection  with  the  present  paper.  We 
may  also  refer  here  to  Wiener’s  Cybernetics  (Wiley,  1948),  dealing  with  the 
general  problems  of  communication  and  control. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


concerned,  as  has  been  emphasized  by  Wiener,  not  with  opera- 
tions on  particular  functions,  but  with  operations  on  ensembles 
of  functions.  A communication  system  is  designed  not  for  a par- 
ticular speech  function  and  still  less  for  a sine  wave,  but  for  the 
ensemble  of  speech  functions. 


19.  Band  Limited  Ensembles  of  Functions 


If  a function  of  time  f(t)  is  limited  to  the  band  from  0 to  W 
cycles  per  second  it  is  completely  determined  by  giving  its  ordi- 
nates at  a series  of  discrete  points  spaced  seconds  apart  in  the 
manner  indicated  by  the  following  result.5 


Theorem  13:  Let  f{t)  contain  no  frequencies  over  W. 
Then 


where 


CO 

m =£x 


—00 


sin  ir(2Wt  — n) 
7r(2  Wt  — n) 


Xn 


)■ 


In  this  expansion  f(t)  is  represented  as  a sum  of  orthogonal 
functions.  The  coefficients  Xn  of  the  various  terms  can  be  con- 
sidered as  coordinates  in  an  infinite  dimensional  “function  space.” 
In  this  space  each  function  corresponds  to  precisely  one  point 
and  each  point  to  one  function. 

A function  can  be  considered  to  be  substantially  limited  to  a 
time  T if  all  the  ordinates  Xn  outside  this  interval  of  time  are 
zero.  In  this  case  all  but  2 TW  of  the  coordinates  will  be  zero. 
Thus  functions  limited  to  a band  W and  duration  T correspond 
to  points  in  a space  of  2TW  dimensions. 

A subset  of  the  functions  of  band  W and  duration  T corre- 
sponds to  a region  in  this  space.  For  example,  the  functions 
whose  total  energy  is  less  than  or  equal  to  E correspond  to 
points  in  a 2 TW  dimensional  sphere  with  radius  r = \/  2 WE. 

An  ensemble  of  functions  of  limited  duration  and  band  will  be 


5 For  a proof  of  this  theorem  and  further  discussion  see  the  author’s  paper 
“Communication  in  the  Presence  of  Noise”  published  in  the  Proceedings  oj 
the  Institute  oj  Radio  Engineers,  v.  37,  No.  1,  Jan.,  1949,  pp.  10-21. 


Continuous  Information 




represented  by  a probability  distribution  p{x x,  • • • , xn)  in  the 
corresponding  n dimensional  space.  If  the  ensemble  is  not  limited 
in  time  we  can  consider  the  2TW  coordinates  in  a given  interval 
T to  represent  substantially  the  part  of  the  function  in  the 
interval  T and  the  probability  distribution  p{xx,  • • • , xn ) to 
give  the  statistical  structure  of  the  ensemble  for  intervals  of  that 
duration. 


20.  Entropy  of  a Continuous  Distribution 


The  entropy  of  a discrete  set  of  probabilities  plf  • • • , pn  has 
been  defined  as: 

H = — 2 pi  log  pi. 


In  an  analogous  manner  we  define  the  entropy  of  a continuous 
distribution  with  the  density  distribution  function  p(x)  by: 


H = - 


p(x)  log  p(x)  dx. 


With  an  n dimensional  distribution  p{xi,  \ • • , xn)  we  have 


H — — j ' ■ J p(x  1 • ' ’ Xn)  log  p(x  1 


Xn)  dx l 


dxn. 


If  we  have  two  arguments  x and  y (which  may  themselves  be 
multidimensional)  the  joint  and  conditional  entropies  of  p(x,  y ) 
are  given  by 

H(x,  y)  = - JJ p{x,  y)  log  p{x,  y)  dx  dy 

and 

Hx{y)  = -ff  p(x,  y)  log  ~ dx  dy 

Hv{x)  = - JJ p(x,  y)  log  dx  dy 

where 

p(x)  = f p(x,  y)  dy 
p(y)  =Jp(x,  y)  dx. 

The  entropies  of  continuous  distributions  have  most  (but  not 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


all)  of  the  properties  of  the  discrete  case.  In  particular  we  have 
the  following: 


1.  If  x is  limited  to  a certain  volume  v in  its  space,  then  H(x)  is 

a maximum  and  equal  to  log  v when  p(x)  is  constant 
in  the  volume. 


2.  With  any  two  variables  x,  y we  have 

H{x,y)  <H(x)  +H(y ) 


with  equality  if  (and  only  if)  x and  y are  independent,  i.e., 
p(x,y)  = P(x)  Pijjy  (apart  possibly  from  a set  of  points  of 
probability  zero). 


3.  Consider  a generalized  averaging  operation  of  the  following 
type: 

p'(y)  =Ja(x,  V)  p(x)  dx 

with 

Ja(x,  y ) dx  = Ja(x,  y)  dy  - 1,  a(x,  y)  > 0. 


Then  the  entropy  of  the  averaged  distribution  p'(y)  is  equal 
to  or  greater  than  that  of  the  original  distribution  p(x). 

4.  We  have 

H(x,  y)  = H(x)  + Hx{y)  = H(y)  + Hv(x) 

and 

H.(V)  <H(y). 


5.  Let  p(x)  be  a one-dimensional  distribution.  The  form  of  p(x) 
giving  a maximum  entropy  subject  to  the  condition  that  the 
standard  deviation  of  x be  fixed  at  a is  Gaussian.  To  show  this 
we  must  maximize 


with 


H(x)  = — J p{x)  log  p(x)  dx 
= j p(x)x2  dx  and  1 =/ p(x) 


dx 


as  constraints.  This  requires,  by  the  calculus  of  variations, 
maximizing 

J [—  p(x)  log  p(x)  + hp(x)x2  + up(x)]  dx. 


Continuous  Information 




The  condition  for  this  is 

— 1 — log  p (z)  + \x 2 + fi  = 0 

and  consequently  (adjusting  the  constants  to  satisfy  the  con- 
straints) 


V 0)  = 


V27T 


e-(i2/2<rI)> 


Similarly  in  n dimensions,  suppose  the  second  order  moments 
of  p(xlf  • • • , xn)  are  fixed  at  A^: 


Ay  = [■  • ■ f XiXjp(xi , •••,£„)  dx i • 


dxn. 


Then  the  maximum  entropy  occurs  (by  a similar  calculation) 
when  p(x1}  • • * , xn)  is  the  n dimensional  Gaussian  distribu- 
tion with  the  second  order  moments  A ij. 

6.  The  entropy  of  a one-dimensional  Gaussian  distribution  whose 
standard  deviation  is  a is  given  by 


H (z)  = log  a. 

This  is  calculated  as  follows: 


pM  = '~7T~ 

V 2 7r  <r 


g-(i720 


log  p{x)  = log  \/2ir  a + 


x* 


2 <r2 


H(x)  = — J p(x)  log  p(x)  dx 

= J p{x)  log  ■\/2'k  <t  dx  + jp{x) 

-2 

= log  \/  2ir  <r  + 


x* 


2<r2 


dx 


2<t2 


= log  V2tt  <t  + log  V e 


= log  y/2ire  a . 

Similarly  the  n dimensional  Gaussian  distribution  with  asso- 
ciated quadratic  form  a a is  given  by 


p(x i,  • • • , xn)  = 


a 


1 7 


(2? r) 


n/2 


exp  (—  \ 2ai}XiXj) 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


and  the  entropy  can  be  calculated  as 

H = log  (2tt e)*'2 1 an  |-* 

where  | ai;-  | is  the  determinant  whose  elements  are  a a. 

7.  If  x is  limited  to  a half  line  (p(x)  = 0 for  x < 0)  and  the  first 
moment  of  x is  fixed  at  a: 

fco 

a = / p(x)x  dx, 

Jo 

then  the  maximum  entropy  occurs  when 

p(x ) = — e~ix,a) 
a 

and  is  equal  to  log  ea. 

8.  There  is  one  important  difference  between  the  continuous  and 
discrete  entropies.  In  the  discrete  case  the  entropy  measures  in 
an  absolute  way  the  randomness  of  the  chance  variable.  In  the 
continuous  case  the  measurement  is  relative  to  the  coordinate 
system.  If  we  change  coordinates  the  entropy  will  in  general 


change.  In  fact  if  we  change  to  coordinates  yx 
entropy  is  given  by 


yn  the  new 


H(y)  =f  - ■ fp(x,  - ■ 

log  p(xi  ■ ■ ■ x„)  J dyi 


dyn 


where  J is  the  Jacobian  of  the  coordinate  transformation. 

On  expanding  the  logarithm  and  changing  variables  to  xx  • • • 
x„,  we  obtain: 

H(y)  = H(x)  fp(x i,  •••,£»)  log  dxi  ■ ■ ■ dxn. 

Thus  the  new  entropy  is  the  old  entropy  less  the  expected  log- 
arithm of  the  Jacobian.  In  the  continuous  case  the  entropy  can 
be  considered  a measure  of  randomness  relative  to  an  assumed 
standard,  namely  the  coordinate  system  chosen  with  each 
small  volume  element  dxx  • • • dxn  given  equal  weight.  When 
we  change  the  coordinate  system  the  entropy  in  the  new  sys- 
tem measures  the  randomness  when  equal  volume  elements 
dyi  • • • dyn  in  the  new  system  are  given  equal  weight. 

In  spite  of  this  dependence  on  the  coordinate  system  the 


Continuous  Information 




entropy  concept  is  as  important  in  the  continuous  case  as  the 
discrete  case.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  derived  concepts 
of  information  rate  and  channel  capacity  depend  on  the  differ- 
ence of  two  entropies  and  this  difference  does  not  depend  on 
the  coordinate  frame,  each  of  the  two  terms  being  changed  by 
the  same  amount. 

The  entropy  of  a continuous  distribution  can  be  negative. 
The  scale  of  measurements  sets  an  arbitrary  zero  correspond- 
ing to  a uniform  distribution  over  a unit  volume.  A distribu- 
tion which  is  more  confined  than  this  has  less  entropy  and  will 
be  negative.  The  rates  and  capacities  will,  however,  always  be 
non-negative. 

9.  A particular  case  of  changing  coordinates  is  the  linear  trans- 
formation 

y j = ^ ^ ciijXi . 

i 

In  this  case  the  Jacobian  is  simply  the  determinant  | a a |_1  and 

H(y)  = H{x)  + log  | an  |. 

* 

In  the  case  of  a rotation  of  coordinates  {or  any  measure  pre- 
serving transformation)  J = 1 and  H(y)  = H(x). 


21.  Entropy  of  an  Ensemble  of  Functions 

Consider  an  ergodic  ensemble  of  functions  limited  to  a certain 
band  of  width  W cycles  per  second.  Let 

V ( xlf  • • • , xn) 

be  the  density  distribution  function  for  amplitudes  xr  • • • xn  at 
n successive  sample  points.  We  define  the  entropy  of  the  ensemble 
per  degree  of  freedom  by 

H'=  -Lim-i-J-  • |p(Xi,  • • -,x.) 

log  p(x  1,  • • • , Xn)  dx  1 • • • dxn. 

We  may  also  define  an  entropy  H per  second  by  dividing,  not  by 
n,  but  by  the  time  T in  seconds  for  n samples.  Since  n = 2 TW, 
H = 2 WH'. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


With  white  thermal  noise  p is  Gaussian  and  we  have 

H'  = log  \/2^eN, 

H — W log  2ireN. 


For  a given  average  power  N,  white  noise  has  the  maximum 
possible  entropy.  This  follows  from  the  maximizing  properties  of 
the  Gaussian  distribution  noted  above. 

The  entropy  for  a continuous  stochastic  process  has  many 
properties  analogous  to  that  for  discrete  processes.  In  the  discrete 
case  the  entropy  was  related  to  the  logarithm  of  the  probability 
of  long  sequences,  and  to  the  number  of  reasonably  probable  se- 
quences of  long  length.  In  the  continuous  case  it  is  related  in  a 
similar  fashion  to  the  logarithm  of  the  probability  density  for  a 
long  series  of  samples,  and  the  volume  of  reasonably  high  proba- 
bility in  the  function  space. 

More  precisely,  if  we  assume  p(x1}  • • • , xn)  continuous  in  all 
the  Xi  for  all  n,  then  for  sufficiently  large  n 


log  V _ H, 
n 


< 6 


for  all  choices  of  (xlf  • • • , x„)  apart  from  a set  whose  total 
probability  is  less  than  8,  with  8 and  e arbitrarily  small.  This  fol- 
lows from  the  ergodic  property  if  we  divide  the  space  into  a large 
number  of  small  cells. 

The  relation  of  H to  volume  can  be  stated  as  follows:  Under 
the  same  assumptions  consider  the  n dimensional  space  corre- 
sponding to  p(x i,  • • • , xn).  Let  Vn(q)  be  the  smallest  volume  in 
this  space  which  includes  in  its  interior  a total  probability  q. 
Then 


Lim 

n— >0° 


log  Vn(q) 
n 


= H' 


provided  q does  not  equal  0 or  1. 

These  results  show  that  for  large  n there  is  a rather  well-defined 
volume  (at  least  in  the  logarithmic  sense)  of  high  probability, 
and  that  within  this  volume  the  probability  density  is  relatively 
uniform  (again  in  the  logarithmic  sense). 

In  the  white  noise  case  the  distribution  function  is  given  by 






2 xi 


p(x  1,  • • * , Xn)  = 


(2wN)nli 


exp  — 


2N 


Continuous  Information 




Since  this  depends  only  on  %x ? the  surfaces  of  equal  probability 
density  are  spheres  and  the  entire  distribution  has  spherical  sym- 
metry. The  region  of  high  probability  is  a sphere  of  radius 
\/  nN.  As  n— » oo  the  probability  of  being  outside  a sphere  of 

radius  \/  n(N  + e)  approaches  zero  however  small  e and  — times 

the  logarithm  of  the  volume  of  the  sphere  approaches  log  \/  2-rreN. 

In  the  continuous  case  it  is  convenient  to  work  not  with  the 
entropy  H of  an  ensemble  but  with  a derived  quantity  which  we 
will  call  the  entropy  power.  This  is  defined  as  the  power  in  a 
white  noise  limited  to  the  same  band  as  the  original  ensemble 
and  having  the  same  entropy.  In  other  words  if  Hf  is  the  entropy 
of  an  ensemble  its  entropy  power  is 


N x = 



2 ire 


exp  2 H'. 


In  the  geometrical  picture  this  amounts  to  measuring  the  high 
probability  volume  by  the  squared  radius  of  a sphere  having  the 
same  volume.  Since  white  noise  has  the  maximum  entropy  for  a 
given  power,  the  entropy  power  of  any  noise  is  less  than  or  equal 
to  its  actual  power. 


22.  Entropy  Loss  in  Linear  Filters 

Theorem  1 If.:  If  an  ensemble  having  an  entropy  Hx  per  degree 
of  freedom  in  band  W is  passed  through  a filter  with  character - 
istic  Y (/)  the  output  ensemble  has  an  entropy 

H,  = Hi  + -±-fw  log  | Y(f)  |*  df. 

The  operation  of  the  filter  is  essentially  a linear  transformation  of 
coordinates.  If  we  think  of  the  different  frequency  components  as 
the  original  coordinate  system,  the  new  frequency  components 
are  merely  the  old  ones  multiplied  by  factors.  The  coordinate 
transformation  matrix  is  thus  essentially  diagonalized  in  terms  of 
these  coordinates.  The  Jacobian  of  the  transformation  is  (for  n 
sine  and  n cosine  components) 

n 

J = II  I Y(fi)  I2  = exp  2 log  | YUi)  l! 

1 = 1 


u 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


where  the  /*  are  equally  spaced  through  the  band  W.  This  be- 
comes in  the  limit 

eXp  ~wfwl°g  ^ I2 d S' 

Since  J is  constant  its  average  value  is  the  same  quantity  and 
applying  the  theorem  on  the  change  of  entropy  with  a change  of 


Continuous  Information 




coordinates,  the  result  follows.  We  may  also  phrase  it  in  terms 
of  the  entropy  power.  Thus  if  the  entropy  power  of  the  first 
ensemble  is  N i that  of  the  second  is 

N,ex p -jyjw  log  | Y(J)  \‘df. 

The  final  entropy  power  is  the  initial  entropy  power  multiplied 
by  the  geometric  mean  gain  of  the  filter.  If  the  gain  is  measured 
in  db,  then  the  output  entropy  power  will  be  increased  by  the 
arithmetic  mean  db  gain  over  W. 

In  Table  I the  entropy  }power  loss  has  been  calculated  (and 
also  expressed  in  db)  for  a number  of  ideal  gain  characteristics. 
The  impulsive  responses  of  these  filters  are  also  given  for 
W = 2i r,  with  phase  assumed  to  be  0. 

The  entropy  loss  for  many  other  cases  can  be  obtained  from 

these  results.  For  example  the  entropy  power  factor  \ for  the 

first  case  also  applies  to  any  gain  characteristic  obtained  from 
1 — <o  by  a measure  preserving  transformation  of  the  <o  axis.  In 
particular  a linearly  increasing  gain  G( o>)  = w,  or  a “saw  tooth” 
characteristic  between  0 and  1 have  the  same  entropy  loss.  The 

reciprocal  gain  has  the  reciprocal  factor.  Thus has  the  factor  e2. 

Raising  the  gain  to  any  power  raises  the  factor  to  this  power. 


23.  Entropy  of  the  Sum  of  Two  Ensembles 

If  we  have  two  ensembles  of  functions  fa{t)  and  gp(t)  we  can 
form  a new  ensemble  by  “addition.”  Suppose  the  first  ensemble 
has  the  probability  density  function  p(xlf  • • • , xn)  and  the 
second  q ( x • • • , xn ) . Then  the  density  function  for  the  sum  is 
given  by  the  convolution: 

r(x i,  • • • , xn)  = J-  • • • • , yn) 

• q(xi  - yh  ■ • • , xn  — yn)  dyi  dy<t  • • • dyn. 

Physically  this  corresponds  to  adding  the  noises  or  signals  repre- 
sented by  the  original  ensembles  of  functions. 

The  following  result  is  derived  in  Appendix  6. 

Theorem  15:  Let  the  average  power  of  two  ensembles  be  Nx 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


and  N2  and  let  their  entropy  powers  be  AO  and  N 2.  Then  the 
entropy  power  of  the  sum,  AO,  is  bounded  by 

n1  + n2<n3<n1  + n2 . 

White  Gaussian  noise  has  the  peculiar  property  that  it  can 
absorb  any  other  noise  or  signal  ensemble  which  may  be  added  to 
it  with  a resultant  entropy  power  approximately  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  white  noise  power  and  the  signal  power  (measured  from 
the  average  signal  value,  which  is  normally  zero),  provided  the 
signal  power  is  small,  in  a certain  sense,  compared  to  the  noise. 

Consider  the  function  space  associated  with  these  ensembles 
having  n dimensions.  The  white  noise  corresponds  to  the  spherical 
Gaussian  distribution  in  this  space.  The  signal  ensemble  corre- 
sponds to  another  probability  distribution,  not  necessarily  Gaus- 
sian or  spherical.  Let  the  second  moments  of  this  distribution 
about  its  center  of  gravity  be  a^.  That  is,  if  p(xu  • • • , xn)  is 
the  density  distribution  function 

aij  = J • • ■ j p(xi  — on ) ( Xj  — otj)  dx i • • • dxn 

where  the  <*i  are  the  coordinates  of  the  center  of  gravity.  Now  an 
is  a positive  definite  quadratic  form,  and  we  can  rotate  our 
coordinate  system  to  align  it  with  the  principal  directions  of  this 
form,  an  is  then  reduced  to  diagonal  form  bn.  We  require  that 
each  bu  be  small  compared  to  N , the  squared  radius  of  the 
spherical  distribution. 

In  this  case  the  convolution  of  the  noise  and  signal  produce 
approximately  a Gaussian  distribution  whose  corresponding 
quadratic  form  is 

N + bH. 

The  entropy  power  of  this  distribution  is 

[n(tf + b„)],/B 

or  approximately 

= [(AO*  + 2MA0"-1]1'" 

= N + — Sba. 

n 

The  last  term  is  the  signal  power,  while  the  first  is  the  noise 
power. 


IV 

The  Continuous  Channel 


24.  The  Capacity  of  a Continuous  Channel 

In  a continuous  channel  the  input  or  transmitted  signals  will  be 
continuous  functions  of  time  /(£)  belonging  to  a certain  set,  and 
the  output  or  received  signals  will  be  perturbed  versions  of  these. 
We  will  consider  only  the  case  where  both  transmitted  and  re- 
ceived signals  are  limited  to  a certain  band  W.  They  can  then  be 
specified,  for  a time  T,  by  2 TW  numbers,  and  their  statistical 
structure  by  finite  dimensional  distribution  functions.  Thus  the 
statistics  of  the  transmitted  signal  will  be  determined  by 

P(x lf  •••,«»)=  P(x) 

and  those  of  the  noise  by  the  conditional  probability  distribution 

PXl,  • • • , *n(yi,  • • • , yn)  = P*(y ). 

The  rate  of  transmission  of  information  for  a continuous  chan- 
nel is  defined  in  a way  analogous  to  that  for  a discrete  channel, 
namely 

R = H{x)  - Hv(x) 

where  H(x)  is  the  entropy  of  the  input  and  Hv(x ) the  equivoca- 
tion. The  channel  capacity  C is  defined  as  the  maximum  of  R 
when  we  vary  the  input  over  all  possible  ensembles.  This  means 
that  in  a finite  dimensional  approximation  we  must  vary  P{x)  = 
P(x i,  • • • , xn)  and  maximize 

-j P(x)  log  P(z)  dx+ff P(X>  V ) log  Pp(y) 


dx  dy. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  oj  Communication 


This  can  be  written 

//P(X’  v)  l0g  PWpfy)  dx  dy 

using  the  fact  that  J J P(x,  y)  log  P(x)  dx  dy  = J P(x)  log  P(x)  dx. 
The  channel  capacity  is  thus  expressed  as  follows: 

c - fc"?  ^ ~yHp{x'  y)  log  PWP(y)  dx  dv ■ 

It  is  obvious  in  this  form  that  R and  C are  independent  of  the 
coordinate  system  since  the  numerator  and  denominator  in  log 
pixy) 

P{x)P(y)  multiplied  by  the  same  factors  when  x and  y 

are  transformed  in  any  one-to-one  way.  This  integral  expression 
for  C is  more  general  than  H{x)  — Hy{x).  Properly  interpreted 
(see  Appendix  7)  it  will  always  exist  while  H(x)  — Hy{x)  may 
assume  an  indeterminate  form  oo  — oo  in  some  cases.  This  occurs, 
for  example,  if  x is  limited  to  a surface  of  fewer  dimensions  than 
n in  its  n dimensional  approximation. 

If  the  logarithmic  base  used  in  computing  H(x)  and  Hy(x)  is 
two  then  'C  is  the  maximum  number  of  binary  digits  that  can  be 
sent  per  second  over  the  channel  with  arbitrarily  small  equivoca- 
tion, just  as  in  the  discrete  case.  This  can  be  seen  physically  by 
dividing  the  space  of  signals  into  a large  number  of  small  cells, 
sufficiently  small  so  that  the  probability  density  Px{y)  of  signal 
x being  perturbed  to  point  y is  substantially  constant  over  a cell 
(either  of  x or  y).  If  the  cells  are  considered  as  distinct  points 
the  situation  is  essentially  the  same  as  a discrete  channel  and  the 
proofs  used  there  will  apply.  But  it  is  clear  physically  that  this 
quantizing  of  the  volume  into  individual  points  cannot  in  any 
practical  situation  alter  the  final  answer  significantly,  provided 
the  regions  are  sufficiently  small.  Thus  the  capacity  will  be  the 
limit  of  the  capacities  for  the  discrete  subdivisions  and  this  is 
just  the  continuous  capacity  defined  above. 

On  the  mathematical  side  it  can  be  shown  first  (see  Appendix  7) 
that  if  u is  the  message,  x is  the  signal,  y is  the  received  signal 
(perturbed  by  noise)  and  v the  recovered  message  then 

H(x)  - Hy(x)  > H(u)  — Hv(u) 


The  Continuous  Channel 




regardless  of  what  operations  are  performed  on  u to  obtain  x or 
on  y to  obtain  v.  Thus  no  matter  how  we  encode  the  binary  digits 
to  obtain  the  signal,  or  how  we  decode  the  received  signal  to 
recover  the  message,  the  discrete  rate  for  the  binary  digits  does 
not  exceed  the  channel  capacity  we  have  defined.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  possible  under  very  general  conditions  to  find  a coding 
system  for  transmitting  binary  digits  at  the  rate  C with  as  small 
an  equivocation  or  frequency  of  errors  as  desired.  This  is  true, 
for  example,  if,  when  we  take  a finite  dimensional  approximating 
space  for  the  signal  functions,  P{x,  y)  is  continuous  in  both  x and 
y except  at  a set  of  points  of  probability  zero. 

An  important  special  case  occurs  when  the  noise  is  added  to 
the  signal  and  is  independent  of  it  (in  the  probability  sense). 
Then  Px(y ) is  a function  only  of  the  (vector)  difference  n = 
(y  — x), 

Px(y)  = Q(y  — x) 

and  we  can  assign  a definite  entropy  to  the  noise  (independent 
of  the  statistics  of  the  signal),  namely  the  entropy  of  the  dis- 
tribution Q(n).  This  entropy  will  be  denoted  by  H(n). 

Theorem  16:  If  the  signal  and  noise  are  independent  and  the 
received  signal  is  the  sum  of  the  transmitted  signal  and  the  noise 
then  the  rate  of  transmission  is 

R = H(y)  -H(n), 

i.e.,  the  entropy  of  the  received  signal  less  the  entropy  of  the 
noise.  The  channel  capacity  is 

C = Ma xH(y)  - H(n). 

P(x) 

We  have,  since  y = x + n: 

H(x,y)  = H(x,n). 

Expanding  the  left  side  and  using  the  fact  that  x and  n are 
independent 

H(y)  +Hv(x)  =H(x)  +H(n). 

Hence 

R H(x)  - Hv(x ) = H(y)  - H(n). 

Since  H(n)  is  independent  of  P(x),  maximizing  R requires 
maximizing  H{y),  the  entropy  of  the  received  signal.  If  there  are 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


certain  constraints  on  the  ensemble  of  transmitted  signals,  the 
entropy  of  the  received  signal  must  be  maximized  subject  to  these 
constraints. 


25.  Channel  Capacity  with  an  Average  Power  Limitation 


A simple  application  of  Theorem  16  occurs  when  the  noise  is  a 
white  thermal  noise  and  the  transmitted  signals  are  limited  to  a 
certain  average  power  P.  Then  the  received  signals  have  an  aver- 
age power  P + N where  N is  the  average  noise  power.  The  max- 
imum entropy  for  the  received  signals  occurs  when  they  also  form 
a white  noise  ensemble  since  this  is  the  greatest  possible  entropy 
for  a power  P + N and  can  be  obtained  by  a suitable  choice  of 
the  ensemble  of  transmitted  signals,  namely  if  they  form  a white 
noise  ensemble  of  power  P.  The  entropy  (per  second)  of  the 
received  ensemble  is  then 

H(y)  = W log  2tt e(P  + N), 
and  the  noise  entropy  is 

H (n)  = W log  2tt eN. 


The  channel  capacity  is 

C = H(y ) - H(n)  = W log  P + N . 
Summarizing  we  have  the  following: 

Theorem  17:  The  capacity  of  a channel  of  band  W perturbed 
by  white  thermal  noise  of  power  N when  the  average  transmitter 
power  is  limited  to  P is  given  by 


C = W log 


P + N 
N 


This  means  that  by  sufficiently  involved  encoding  systems 

pi  N 

we  can  transmit  binary  digits  at  the  rate  W log2 ^ bits 

per  second,  with  arbitrarily  small  frequency  of  errors.  It  is  not 
possible  to  transmit  at  a higher  rate  by  any  encoding  system 
without  a definite  positive  frequency  of  errors. 

To  approximate  this  limiting  rate  of  transmission  the  trans- 
mitted signals  must  approximate,  in  statistical  properties,  a white 


The  Continuous  Channel 




noise.6  A system  which  approaches  the  ideal  rate  may  be  de- 
scribed as  follows:  Let  M = 2®  samples  of  white  noise  be  con- 
structed each  of  duration  T.  These  are  assigned  binary  numbers 
from  0 to  ( M — 1).  At  the  transmitter  the  message  sequences  are 
broken  up  into  groups  of  s and  for  each  group  the  corresponding 
noise  sample  is  transmitted  as  the  signal.  At  the  receiver  the  M 
samples  are  known  and  the  actual  received  signal  (perturbed  by 
noise)  is  compared  with  each  of  them.  The  sample  which  has  the 
least  R.M.S.  discrepancy  from  the  received  signal  is  chosen  as 
the  transmitted  signal  and  the  corresponding  binary  number  re- 
constructed. This  process  amounts  to  choosing  the  most  probable 
(a  'posteriori ) signal.  The  number  M of  noise  samples  used  will 
depend  on  the  tolerable  frequency  e of  errors,  but  for  almost  all 
selections  of  samples  we  have 


Lim  Lim 

«— *o  r-><» 


log  M(«,  T) 
T 


= W log 


P + N 
N ’ 


so  that  no  matter  how  small  e is  chosen,  we  can,  by  taking  T 

P + N 

sufficiently  large,  transmit  as  near  as  we  wish  to  TW  log  — — 


binary  digits  in  the  time  T. 

P + N 

Formulas  similar  to  C = W log ^ for  the  white  noise 

case  have  been  developed  independently  by  several  other 
writers,  although  with  somewhat  different  interpretations.  We 
may  mention  the  work  of  N.  Wiener,7  W.  G.  Tuller,8  and  H. 
Sullivan  in  this  connection. 


In  the  case  of  an  arbitrary  perturbing  noise  (not  necessarily 
white  thermal  noise)  it  does  not  appear  that  the  maximizing 
problem  involved  in  determining  the  channel  capacity  C can  be 
solved  explicitly.  However,  upper  and  lower  bounds  can  be  set 
for  C in  terms  of  the  average  noise  power  N and  the  noise  entropy 
power  Ni.  These  bounds  are  sufficiently  close  together  in  most 


6 This  and  other  properties  of  the  white  noise  case  are  discussed  from  the 
geometrical  point  of  view  in  “Communication  in  the  Presence  of  Noise,” 
loc.  cit. 

1 Cybernetics,  loc.  cit. 

8 “Theoretical  Limitations  on  the  Rate  of  Transmission  of  Information,” 
Proceedings  of  the  Institute  of  Radio  Engineers,  v.  37.  No.  5.  Mav.  1949. 
pp.  468-78. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


practical  cases  to  furnish  a satisfactory  solution  to  the  problem. 


Theorem  18:  The  capacity  of  a channel  of  band  W perturbed 
by  an  arbitrary  noise  is  bounded  by  the  inequalities 


where 


W log 


P + N i 

Ni 


< C < W log 


P + N 

Ni 


P = average  transmitter  power 
N = average  noise  power 
Ni  = entropy  power  of  the  noise. 


Here  again  the  average  power  of  the  perturbed  signals  will  be 
P + N.  The  maximum  entropy  for  this  power  would  occur  if  the 
received  signal  were  white  noise  and  would  be  W log  2ire {P  + N). 
It  may  not  be  possible  to  achieve  this;  i.e.,  there  may  not  be  any 
ensemble  of  transmitted  signals  which,  added  to  the  perturbing 
noise,  produce  a white  thermal  noise  at  the  receiver,  but  at  least 
this  sets  an  upper  bound  to  H(y).  We  have,  therefore 

C = Max  H(y)  - H{n) 

< W log  2tt e(P  + N)  -W  log  2neN1. 


This  is  the  upper  limit  given  in  the  theorem.  The  lower  limit  can 
be  obtained  by  considering  the  rate  if  we  make  the  transmitted 
signal  a white  noise,  of  power  P.  In  this  case  the  entropy  power 
of  the  received  signal  must  be  at  least  as  great  as  that  of  a white 
noise  of  power  P + N x since  we  have  shown  in  Theorem  15  that 
the  entropy  power  of  the  sum  of  two  ensembles  is  greater  than  or 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  individual  entropy  powers.  Hence 


and 


Max  H{y)  > W log  e(P  + Ni) 


C > W log  2tt e(P  + Ni)  -W  log  2ireNi 


= W log 


P + N i 
Ni 


As  P increases,  the  upper  and  lower  bounds  in  Theorem  18  ap- 
proach each  other,  so  we  have  as  an  asymptotic  rate 


W lOg  ; 


P + N 
Nx 


If  the  noise  is  itself  white,  N — Ni  and  the  result  reduces  to  the 
formula  proved  previously: 


The  Continuous  Channel 




C = w log  (l  + -£-). 

If  the  noise  is  Gaussian  but  with  a spectrum  which  is  not  nec- 
essarily flat,  iVi  is  the  geometric  mean  of  the  noise  power  over  the 
various  frequencies  in  the  band  W.  Thus 

Ni  = exp  -j^^log  N(f)  df 


where  N (/)  is  the  noise  power  at  frequency  /. 

Theorem  19:  If  we  set  the  capacity  for  a given  transmitter 
power  P equal  to 


C = W log 


P + IV  - v 
N1 


then  y is  monotonic  decreasing  as  P increases  and  approaches  0 
as  a limit. 

Suppose  that  for  a given  power  Px  the  channel  capacity  is 


W log 


Pi  T N — y\ 
Ni 


This  means  that  the  best  signal  distribution,  say  p(x),  when 
added  to  the  noise  distribution  q (x) , gives  a received  distribution 
r(y)  whose  entropy  power  is  (Px  + N — yj.  Let  us  increase  the 
power  to  Pi  + A P by  adding  a white  noise  of  power  A P to  the 
signal.  The  entropy  of  the  received  signal  is  now  at  least 

H(y)  = W log  2tt e(Px  + N — Vl  + AP) 


by  application  of  the  theorem  on  the  minimum  entropy  power  of 
a sum.  Hence,  since  we  can  attain  the  H indicated,  the  entropy  of 
the  maximizing  distribution  must  be  at  least  as  great  and  y must 
be  monotonic  decreasing.  To  show  that  y — > 0 as  P oo  consider 
a signal  which  is  a white  noise  with  a large  P.  Whatever  the  per- 
turbing noise,  the  received  signal  will  be  approximately  a white 
noise,  if  P is  sufficiently  large,  in  the  sense  of  having  an  entropy 
power  approaching  P + N. 


26.  The  Channel  Capacity  with  a Peak  Power  Limitation 

In  some  applications  the  transmitter  is  limited  not  by  the  average 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


power  output  but  by  the  peak  instantaneous  power.  The  problem 
of  calculating  the  channel  capacity  is  then  that  of  maximizing 
(by  variation  of  the  ensemble  of  transmitted  symbols) 

H(y)-H(n) 


subject  to  the  constraint  that  all  the  functions  f(t)  in  the  en- 
semble be  less  than  or  equal  to  \/ S , say,  for  all  t.  A constraint 
of  this  type  does  not  work  out  as  well  mathematically  as  the 
average  power  limitation.  The  most  we  have  obtained  for  this 

<EJ 

case  is  a lower  bound  valid  for  all  -£j-,  an  “asymptotic”  upper 


bound 


^valid  for  large 


and  an  asymptotic  value  of  C for 


S_ 

N 


small. 


Theorem  20:  The  channel  capacity  C for  a band  W perturbed 
by  white  thermal  noise  of  power  N is  bounded  by 

C > W log  - V 4-, 

& 7 re*  N 


where  S is  the  peak  allowed  transmitter  power.  For  sufficiently 
large 

iV  9 

— S + N 

C>w  log  (1  + «) 


where  e is  arbitrarily  small.  As  — >0  ( and  provided  the  band  W 

starts  at  0) 

CfW  log  (l +-£-)-!• 

We  wish  to  maximize  the  entropy  of  the  received  signal.  If 
is  large  this  will  occur  very  nearly  when  we  maximize  the 

entropy  of  the  transmitted  ensemble. 

The  asymptotic  upper  bound  is  obtained  by  relaxing  the  condi- 
tions on  the  ensemble.  Let  us-  suppose  that  the  power  is  limited 
to  S not  at  every  instant  of  time,  but  only  at  the  sample  points. 
The  maximum  entropy  of  the  transmitted  ensemble  under  these 


The  Continuous  Channel 




weakened  conditions  is  certainly  greater  than  or  equal  to  that 
under  the  original  conditions.  This  altered  problem  can  be  solved 
easily.  The  maximum  entropy  occurs  if  the  different  samples  are 
independent  and  have  a distribution  function  which  is  constant 
from  — + y/~S.  The  entropy  can  be  calculated  as 

W log  4 S. 

The  received  signal  will  then  have  an  entropy  less  than 

W log  (4 S + 2-n-eN)  (1  + c) 

with  € — ► 0 as  — > oo  and  the  channel  capacity  is  obtained  by 

subtracting  the  entropy  of  the  white  noise,  W log  2weN : 

W log  (4 S + 2t eN)  (1  + e)  — W log  ( 2ireN ) 

— S + N 

= W log  (1  + «)• 


This  is  the  desired  upper  bound  to  the  channel  capacity. 

To  obtain  a lower  bound  consider  the  same  ensemble  of  func- 
tions. Let  these  functions  be  passed  through  an  ideal  filter  with  a 
triangular  transfer  characteristic.  The  gain  is  to  be  unity  at  fre- 
quency 0 and  decline  linearly  down  to  gain  0 at  frequency  W. 
We  first  show  that  the  output  functions  of  the  filter  have  a peak 
power  limitation  S at  all  times  (not  just  the  sample  points).  First 

we  note  that  a pulse  S1^  g°ing  info  the  filter  produces 


2,r  Wt 


sin2  7r  Wt 
(irWt)2 


in  the  output.  This  function  is  never  negative.  The  input  function 
(in  the  general  case)  can  be  thought  of  as  the  sum  of  a series  of 
shifted  functions 

sin  2irWt 
a 2 irWt 

where  a,  the  amplitude  of  the  sample,  is  not  greater  than  \/lS. 
Hence  the  output  is  the  sum  of  shifted  functions  of  the  non- 
negative form  above  with  the  same  coefficients.  These  functions 
being  non-negative,  the  greatest  positive  value  for  any  t is  ob- 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


tained  when  all  the  coefficients  a have  their  maximum  positive 
values,  i.e.,  V S . In  this  case  the  input  function  was  a constant 
of  amplitude  \/S"  and  since  the  filter  has  unit  gain  for  D.C.,  the 
output  is  the  same.  Hence  the  output  ensemble  has  a peak 
power  S. 

The  entropy  of  the  output  ensemble  can  be  calculated  from  that 
of  the  input  ensemble  by  using  the  theorem  dealing  with  such  a 
situation.  The  output  entropy  is  equal  to  the  input  entropy  plus 
the  geometrical  mean  gain  of  the  filter: 

rw  rw  / w — f V 

i,  logff2d/=J0  loH— w^)d}=  ~2W- 


Hence  the  output  entropy  is 

W log  4£  — 2W  = W log 
and  the  channel  capacity  is  greater  than 


W log 


7re° 


S 

N • 


e1 


We  now  wish  to  show  that,  for  small  (peak  signal  power 

over  average  white  noise  power),  the  channel  capacity  is  ap- 
proximately 


c = w log  (l  + -J-). 


More  precisely  C/W  log  (l  + ) — * 1 as  ^ — * 0.  Since  the 

average  signal  power  P is  less  than  or  equal  to  the  peak  S,  it 

S 


follows  that  for  all 


N 


C < W log  (l  + -0  < W log  (l  + J-). 


Therefore,  if  we  can  find  an  ensemble  of  functions  such  that 

they  correspond  to  a rate  nearly  W log  (l  + and  are 

limited  to  band  W and  peak  S the  result  will  be  proved.  Consider 
the  ensemble  of  functions  of  the  following  type.  A series  of  t 
samples  have  the  same  value,  either  +\AS  or  —\/S  , then 
the  next  t samples  have  the  same  value,  etc.  The  value  for  a 


The  Continuous  Channel 




series  is  chosen  at  random,  probability  \ for  +\AS  and  £ for 
—yj S . If  this  ensemble  be  passed  through  a filter  with  triangu- 
lar gain  characteristic  (unit  gain  at  D.C.),  the  output  is  peak 
limited  to  ± S.  Furthermore  the  average  power  is  nearly  S and 
can  be  made  to  approach  this  by  taking  t sufficiently  large. 
The  entropy  of  the  sum  of  this  and  the  thermal  noise  can  be 
found  by  applying  the  theorem  on  the  sum  of  a noise  and  a small 
signal.  This  theorem  will  apply  if 

rr  s 

V<  w 

s 

is  sufficiently  small.  This  can  be  insured  by  taking  small 

enough  (after  t is  chosen).  The  entropy  power  will  be  S-\-N  to 
as  close  an  approximation  as  desired,  and  hence  the  rate  of 
transmission  as  near  as  we  wish  to 


The  Rate  for  a Continuous  Source 


27.  Fidelity  Evaluation  Functions 

In  the  case  of  a discrete  source  of  information  we  were  able  to 
determine  a definite  rate  of  generating  information,  namely  the 
entropy  of  the  underlying  stochastic  process.  With  a continuous 
source  the  situation  is  considerably  more  involved.  In  the  first 
place  a continuously  variable  quantity  can  assume  an  infinite 
number  of  values  and  requires,  therefore,  an  infinite  number  of 
binary  digits  for  exact  specification.  This  means  that  to  transmit 
the  output  of  a continuous  source  with  exact  recovery  at  the  re- 
ceiving point  requires,  in  general,  a channel  of  infinite  capacity 
(in  bits  per  second).  Since,  ordinarily,  channels  have  a certain 
amount  of  noise,  and  therefore  a finite  capacity,  exact  transmis- 
sion is  impossible. 

This,  however,  evades  the  real  issue.  Practically,  we  are  not 
interested  in  exact  transmission  when  we  have  a continuous 
source,  but  only  in  transmission  to  within  a certain  tolerance.  The 
question  is,  can  we  assign  a definite  rate  to  a continuous  source 
when  we  require  only  a certain  fidelity  of  recovery,  measured  in 
a suitable  way.  Of  course,  as  the  fidelity  requirements  are  in- 
creased the  rate  will  increase.  It  will  be  shown  that  we  can,  in 
very  general  cases,  define  such  a rate,  having  the  property  that 
it  is  possible,  by  properly  encoding  the  information,  to  transmit  it 
over  a channel  whose  capacity  is  equal  to  the  rate  in  question, 
and  satisfy  the  fidelity  requirements.  A channel  of  smaller  ca- 
pacity is  insufficient. 


The  Rate  for  a Continuous  Source 




It  is  first  necessary  to  give  a general  mathematical  formulation 
of  the  idea  of  fidelity  of  transmission.  Consider  the  set  of  mes- 
sages of  a long  duration,  say  T seconds.  The  source  is  described 
by  giving  the  probability  density,  P(x),  in  the  associated  space, 
that  the  source  will  select  the  message  in  question.  A given  com- 
munication system  is  described  (from  the  external  point  of  view) 
by  giving  the  conditional  probability  Px(y)  that  if  message  x is 
produced  by  the  source  the  recovered  message  at  the  receiving 
point  will  be  y.  The  system  as  a whole  (including  source  and 
transmission  system)  is  described  by  the  probability  function 
P(x,y)  of  having  message  x and  final  output  y.  If  this  function 
is  known,  the  complete  characteristics  of  the  system  from  the 
point  of  view  of  fidelity  are  known.  Any  evaluation  of  fidelity 
must  correspond  mathematically  to  an  operation  applied  to 
P(x,y).  This  operation  must  at  least  have  the  properties  of  a 
simple  ordering  of  systems;  i.e.,  it  must  be  possible  to  say  of  two 
systems  represented  by  Pi(x,  y)  and  P2(x,y)  that,  according  to 
our  fidelity  criterion,  either  (1)  the  first  has  higher  fidelity, 
(2)  the  second  has  higher  fidelity,  or  (3)  they  have  equal  fidelity. 
This  means  that  a criterion  of  fidelity  can  be  represented  by  a 
numerically  valued  evaluation  function : 

v{P(x}y)) 

whose  argument  ranges  over  possible  probability  functions 
P(x,  y).  The  function  v(P{x,  y))  orders  communication  systems 
according  to  fidelity,  and  for  convenience  we  take  lower  values  of 
v to  correspond  to  “higher  fidelity.” 

We  will  now  show  that  under  very  general  and  reasonable  as- 
sumptions the  function  v(P{x,  y))  can  be  written  in  a seemingly 
much  more  specialized  form,  namely  as  an  average  of  a function 
p(x,  y)  over  the  set  of  possible  values  of  x and  y: 

v(P(x,  y))  = JJP(x,  y)  p(x,  y)  dx  dy. 

To  obtain  this  we  need  only  assume  (1)  that  the  source  and  sys- 
tem are  ergodic  so  that  a very  long  sample  will  be,  with  proba- 
bility nearly  1,  typical  of  the  ensemble,  and  (2)  that  the  evalua- 
tion is  “reasonable”  in  the  sense  that  it  is  possible,  by  observing 
a typical  input  and  output  xx  and  ylt  to  form  a tentative  evalua- 


no 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


tion  on  the  basis  of  these  samples;  and  if  these  samples  are  in- 
creased in  duration  the  tentative  evaluation  will,  with  probability 
1,  approach  the  exact  evaluation  based  on  a full  knowledge  of 
P{x,  y).  Let  the  tentative  evaluation  be  p(x,  y).  Then  the  func- 
tion p{x,y)  approaches  (as  T— »oo)  a constant  for  almost  all 
(x,  y)  which  are  in  the  high  probability  region  corresponding  to 
the  system: 

P(x,y)  -+v(P(x,y)) 
and  we  may  also  write 

p(s,  y)  -* ffp(x>  y ) pOl  y ) dx  dy 

since 

J I P(x,  y)  dx  dy  = 1. 

This  establishes  the  desired  result. 

The  function  p{x,  y)  has  the  general  nature  of  a “distance” 
between  x and  y .9  It  measures  how  undesirable  it  is  (according  to 
our  fidelity  criterion)  to  receive  y when  x is  transmitted.  The 
general  result  given  above  can  be  restated  as  follows:  Any  reas- 
onable evaluation  can  be  represented  as  an  average  of  a distance 
function  over  the  set  of  messages  and  recovered  messages  x and  y 
weighted  according  to  the  probability  P(x,y)  of  getting  the  pair 
in  question,  provided  the  duration  T of  the  messages  be  taken 
sufficiently  large. 

The  following  are  simple  examples  of  evaluation  functions: 

1.  R.M.S.  criterion. 

v = (x(t)  - y(t))2 

In  this  very  commonly  used  measure  of  fidelity  the  distance 
function  p{x,  y)  is  (apart  from  a constant  factor)  the  square 
of  the  ordinary  euclidean  distance  between  the  points  x and  y 
in  the  associated  function  space. 

pCl  y)  = ~y~Jo  fr(0  - y(t)]2  dt 

2.  Frequency  weighted  R.M.S.  criterion.  More  generally  one  can 
apply  different  weights  to  the  different  frequency  components 

9 It  is  not  a “metric”  in  the  strict  sense,  however,  since  in  general  it  does 
not  satisfy  either  p(x,y)  — p(y,x ) or  p{x,y)  + p(y,z)  > p(x,z). 


The  Rate  for  a Continuous  Source 




before  using  an  R.M.S.  measure  of  fidelity.  This  is  equivalent 
to  passing  the  difference  x{t)  — y{t)  through  a shaping  filter 
and  then  determining  the  average  power  in  the  output.  Thus  let 


and 


then 


e(t)  = x(t)  - y{t) 

rCQ 

f(t)  = I e{r)k{t  — t ) dr 

J — CO 


pfrf  y)  = -jrfo  /(02  dt. 

3.  Absolute  error  criterion. 


p(z,  y) 


1 T 

T~L  I X ® ~ V ® I dt 


4.  The  structure  of  the  ear  and  brain  determine  implicitly  a num- 
ber of  evaluations,  appropriate  in  the  case  of  speech  or  music 
transmission.  There  is,  for  example,  an  “intelligibility”  crite- 
rion in  which  p(x,y)  is  equal  to  the  relative  frequency  of  in- 
correctly interpreted  words  when  message  x(t)  is  received  as 
y(t).  Although  we  cannot  give  an  explicit  representation  of 
p(x,y)  in  these  cases  it  could,  in  principle,  be  determined  by 
sufficient  experimentation.  Some  of  its  properties  follow  from 
well-known  experimental  results  in  hearing,  e.g.,  the  ear  is 
relatively  insensitive  to  phase  and  the  sensitivity  to  amplitude 
and  frequency  is  roughly  logarithmic. 

5.  The  discrete  case  can  be  considered  as  a specialization  in  which 
we  have  tacitly  assumed  an  evaluation  based  on  the  frequency 
of  errors.  The  function  p(x,  y)  is  then  defined  as  the  number 
of  symbols  in  the  sequence  y differing  from  the  corresponding 
symbols  in  x divided  by  the  total  number  of  symbols  in  x. 


28.  The  Rate  for  a Source  Relative  to  a Fidelity  Evaluation 

We  are  now  in  a position  to  define  a rate  of  generating  informa- 
tion for  a continuous  source.  We  are  given  P(x)  for  the  source 
and  an  evaluation  v determined  by  a distance  function  p{x,  y) 
which  will  be  assumed  continuous  in  both  x and  y.  With  a par- 
ticular system  P(x,  y)  the  quality  is  measured  by 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


v 


J I p(x,  y)  P(x,  y)  dx  dy. 


Furthermore  the  rate  of  flow  of  binary  digits  corresponding  to 
P{x,y)  is 


R = jj  P(x,  y)  log 


P(x,  y) 

P(x)P(y) 


dx 


dy. 


We  define  the  rate  Rx  of  generating  information  for  a given  qual- 
ity vx  of  reproduction  to  be  the  minimum  of  R when  we  keep  v 
fixed  at  and  vary  Px{y).  That  is: 

Kl  = y)  log  P(%P(y)  dx  dy 

subject  to  the  constraint: 

Vi  = JJ P(x,  y)p(x,  y)  dx  dy. 


This  means  that  we  consider,  in  effect,  all  the  communication 
systems  that  might  be  used  and  that  transmit  with  the  required 
fidelity.  The  rate  of  transmission  in  bits  per  second  is  calculated 
for  each  one  and  we  choose  that  having  the  least  rate.  This  latter 
rate  is  the  rate  we  assign  the  source  for  the  fidelity  in  question. 

The  justification  of  this  definition  lies  in  the  following  result: 

Theorem  21:  If  a source  has  a rate  Ri  for  a valuation  vx  it  is 
possible  to  encode  the  output  of  the  source  and  transmit  it  over  a 
channel  of  capacity  C with  fidelity  as  near  iq  as  desired  provided 
.Ri  < C.  This  is  not  possible  if  Rx  > C. 

The  last  statement  in  the  theorem  follows  immediately  from 
the  definition  of  R\  and  previous  results.  If  it  were  not  true  we 
could  transmit  more  than  C bits  per  second  over  a channel  of 
capacity  C.  The  first  part  of  the  theorem  is  proved  by  a method 
analogous  to  that  used  for  Theorem  11.  We  may,  in  the  first  place, 
divide  the  (x,  y)  space  into  a large  number  of  small  cells  and 
represent  the  situation  as  a discrete  case.  This  will  not  change  the 
evaluation  function  by  more  than  an  arbitrarily  small  amount 
(when  the  cells  are  very  small)  because  of  the  continuity  assumed 
for  p(x,  y).  Suppose  that  P1(x,  y)  is  the  particular  system  which 
minimizes  the  rate  and  gives  Rx.  We  choose  from  the  high  proba- 
bility j/’sa  set  at  random  containing 

2(fli+or 


The  Rate  for  a Continuous  Source 


US 


members  where  e — » 0 as  T — > oo . With  large  T each  chosen  point 
will  be  connected  by  high  probability  lines  (as  in  Fig.  10)  to  a set 
of  rr’s.  A calculation  similar  to  that  used  in  proving  Theorem  11 
shows  that  with  large  T almost  all  x’s  are  covered  by  the  fans 
from  the  chosen  y points  for  almost  all  choices  of  the  y’s.  The 
communication  system  to  be  used  operates  as  follows:  The  se- 
lected points  are  assigned  binary  numbers.  When  a message  x is 
originated  it  will  (with  probability  approaching  1 as  T — » oo)  lie 
within  at  least  one  of  the  fans.  The  corresponding  binary  number 
is  transmitted  (or  one  of  them  chosen  arbitrarily  if  there  are  sev- 
eral) over  the  channel  by  suitable  coding  means  to  give  a small 
probability  of  error.  Since  Rx<  C this  is  possible.  At  the  receiv- 
ing point  the  corresponding  y is  reconstructed  and  used  as  the 
recovered  message. 

The  evaluation  v[  for  this  system  can  be  made  arbitrarily  close 
to  vx  by  taking  T sufficiently  large.  This  is  due  to  the  feet  that  for 
each  long  sample  of  message  :r(£)  and  recovered  message  y{t)  the 
evaluation  approaches  vY  (with  probability  1). 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  in  this  system,  the  noise  in  the 
recovered  message  is  actually  produced  by  a kind  of  general 
quantizing  at  the  transmitter  and  is  not  produced  by  the  noise  in 
the  channel.  It  is  more  or  less  analogous  to  the  quantizing  noise 
in  PCM. 


29.  The  Calculation  of  Rates 


The  definition  of  the  rate  is  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  defi- 
nition of  channel  capacity.  In  the  former 


K = Min  //*>(*,  y ) log  d*  dy 

with  P(x)  and  v\  = J J P{x , y)p(x,  y)  dx  dy  fixed.  In  the  latter 

C ” ¥SX//P(X-  y)  log  P^P(y)  dx  dy 


with  Px{y)  fixed  and  possibly  one  or  more  other  constraints  (e.g., 
an  average  power  limitation)  of  the  form  K = ff  P(x,  y)  X(x , y) 
dx  dy. 

A partial  solution  of  the  general  maximizing  problem  for  de- 


m 


The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


termining  the  rate  of  a source  can  be  given.  Using  Lagrange’s 
method  we  consider 

//[p(x,  y)  log  p^pfy)-  + M P(x,  vMx,  V)  ^ 

+ v{x)P{x,  y)  | dx  dy. 

The  variational  equation  (when  we  take  the  first  variation  on 
P(x,  y) ) leads  to 

Py(x)  = B(x)  e~xp(x’v) 


where  k is  determined  to  give  the  required  fidelity  and  B{x)  is 
chosen  to  satisfy 


e-\p(x,y ) fa 


1. 


This  shows  that,  with  best  encoding,  the  conditional  probability 
of  a certain  cause  for  various  received  y,  Py{x)  will  decline  ex- 
ponentially with  the  distance  function  p{x,  y)  between  the  x and 
y in  question. 

In  the  special  case  where  the  distance  function  p(x,  y)  depends 
only  on  the  (vector)  difference  between  x and  y, 

p(x,y)  = P(x  — y) 

we  have 

J B(x)  g-Ms-w)  dx  = 1. 


Hence  B (z)  is  constant,  say  a,  and 

Py(x)  = ae-x^x~v). 


Unfortunately  these  formal  solutions  are  difficult  to  evaluate  in 
particular  cases  and  seem  to  be  of  little  value.  In  fact,  the  actual 
calculation  of  rates  has  been  carried  out  in  only  a few  very  simple 
cases. 

If  the  distance  function  p(x,  y)  is  the  mean  square  discrepancy 
between  x and  y and  the  message  ensemble  is  white  noise,  the 
rate  can  be  determined.  In  that  case  we  have 

R = Min  [H(x)  - Hv(x)]  = H(x)  - Max  Hy(x) 


with  N = (x  — y)2.  But  the  Max  Hv(x ) occurs  when  y — x is  a 


The  Rate  for  a Continuous  Source 




white  noise,  and  is  equal  to  W i log  2ireN  where  Wx  is  the  band- 
width of  the  message  ensemble.  Therefore 


R = W i log  2weQ  — Wi  log  2TreN 

Q 


= W i log 


N 


where  Q is  the  average  message  power.  This  proves  the  following: 

Theorem  22:  The  rate  for  a white  noise  source  of  power  Q and 
band  W x relative  to  an  R.M.S.  measure  of  fidelity  is 

R = W\  log  4- 


where  N is  the  allowed  mean  square  error  between  original  and 
recovered  messages. 

More  generally  with  any  message  source  we  can  obtain  inequal- 
ities bounding  the  rate  relative  to  a mean  square  error  criterion. 

Theorem  23:  The  rate  for  any  source  of  band  Wx  is  bounded  by 
W,  log  < R < W,  log  4 


where  Q is  the  average  power  of  the  source,  Qx  its  entropy  power 
and  N the  allowed  mean  square  error. 

The  lower  bound  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  Max  Hy(x)  for 
a given  (x  — y)2  = N occurs  in  th.e  white  noise  case.  The  upper 
bound  results  if  we  place  the  points  (used  in  the  proof  of  Theorem 
21)  not  in  the  best  way  but  at  random  in  a sphere  of  radius 

VQ-n. 


Acknowledgments 

The  writer  is  indebted  to  his  colleagues  at  the  Laboratories,  par- 
ticularly to  Dr.  H.  W.  Bode,  Dr.  J.  R.  Pierce,  Dr.  B.  McMillan, 
and  Dr.  B.  M.  Oliver  for  many  helpful  suggestions  and  criticisms 
during  the  course  of  this  work.  Credit  should  also  be  given  to 
Professor  N.  Wiener,  whose  elegant  solution  of  the  problems  of 
filtering  and  prediction  of  stationary  ensembles  has  considerably 
influenced  the  writer’s  thinking  in  this  field. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


Appendix  1.  The  Growth  of  a Number  of  Blocks  of  Symbols 
with  a Finite  State  Condition 


Let  Ni(L)  be  the  number  of  blocks  of  symbols  of  length  L end- 
ing in  state  i.  Then  we  have 

N,(L)  = SjVj(L  - blf) 

IS 

where  b\j , b\j , • • • , 6™  are  the  length  of  the  symbols  which  may 
be  chosen  in  state  i and  lead  to  state  j.  These  are  linear  differ- 
ence equations  and  the  behavior  as  L — » oo  must  be  of  the  type 

Nj  = AjWL. 

Substituting  in  the  difference  equation 

AjWL  = HAiWL-b^ 

i,S 

or 

Ai  = YsAiW-^ 

is 

ECZlF-C’-  Si,)Ai  = o. 

» s 

For  this  to  be  possible  the  determinant 

D(W)  = | an  | = |E W-<V  - Si,  | 

s 


must  vanish  and  this  determines  W,  which  is,  of  course,  the 
largest  real  root  of  D = 0. 

The  quantity  C is  then  given  by 


C = Lim 

L, — ► co 


log  '2AjWL 
L 


= log  W 


and  we  also  note  that  the  same  growth  properties  result  if  we 
require  that  all  blocks  start  in  the  same  (arbitrarily  chosen)  state. 


Appendix  2.  Derivation  of  H = — X pi  log  pt 

Let  H ( — , — , •••,  — ) = A (n).  From  condition  (3)  we  can 
\ to  • to  • to  / 

decompose  a choice  from  sm  equally  likely  possibilities  into  a 
series  of  m choices  each  from  s equally  likely  possibilities  and 
obtain 


yl(sw)  = m A{s). 


Appendixes 




Similarly 


A(tn)  = n A(t). 


We  can  choose  n arbitrarily  large  and  find  an  m to  satisfy 

sm  <tn  < s(w+1). 


Thus,  taking  logarithms  and  dividing  by  n log  s, 


m ^ log  t 
n ~ log  s 


< 


m 

n 


or 


m 

n 


log  t 

log  s 


< e 


where  c is  arbitrarily  small.  Now  from  the  monotonic  property  of 
A(n ), 

i4(sw)  < A (tn)  < ^(sw+1) 
mA{s)  < nA(t)  < (m  + 1)  .A(s). 


Hence,  dividing  by  nA(s), 


m 

n 


A(t)  m l 

~ A(s)  ~ n n 


m 

n 


A{t) 

A(s) 


< e 


A(t) 

A(s) 


log  t 
log  s 


< 2e 


A(t)  = - K log  t 


where  K must  be  positive  to  satisfy  (2). 

Now  suppose  we  have  a choice  from  n possibilities  with  com- 

measurable  probabilities  pi  = ^7  where  the  Ui  are  integers.  We 

can  break  down  a choice  from  Xni  possibilities  into  a choice  from 
n possibilities  with  probabilities  plf  • • • , pn  and  then,  if  the  ith 
was  chosen,  a choice  from  ni  with  equal  probabilities.  Using  con- 
dition 3 again,  we  equate  the  total  choice  from  Sfti  as  computed 
by  two  methods 

K log  %Ui  = H (p1}  • • • , pn)  + K%  pi  log 

Hence 

H — K[2pi  log  2 Ui  — 2 pi  log  to,-] 

= - K2pi  log  = — KUpi  log  p^ 

If  the  pi  are  incommeasurable,  they  may  be  approximated  by 
rationals  and  the  same  expression  must  hold  by  our  continuity 
assumption.  Thus  the  expression  holds  in  general.  The  choice  of 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


coefficient  K is  a matter  of  convenience  and  amounts  to  the  choice 
of  a unit  of  measure. 


Appendix  3.  Theorems  on  Ergodic  Sources 


We  assume  the  source  to  be  ergodic  so  that  the  strong  law  of  large 
numbers  can  be  applied.  Thus  the  number  of  times  a given  path 
Pij  in  the  network  is  traversed  in  a long  sequence  of  length  N is 
about  proportional  to  the  probability  of  being  at  i,  say  Pi,  and 
then  choosing  this  path,  PiPijN.  If  N is  large  enough  the  proba- 
bility of  percentage  error  ± 8 in  this  is  less  than  e so  that  for  all 
but  a set  of  small  probability  the  actual  numbers  lie  within  the 
limits 

( PiPn  ± 8)N. 

Hence  nearly  all  sequences  have  a probability  p given  by 


p = Up^-“±,)N 


and  is  limited  by 


N 


log  p 
N 


= 2 (PiPa  ± 5)  log  pa 


or 


log  p 
N 


— 2P iPij  log  pa 


< V- 


This  proves  Theorem  3. 

Theorem  4 follows  immediately  from  this  on  calculating  upper 
and  lower  bounds  for  n(q ) basfcd  on  the  possible  range  of  values 
of  p in  Theorem  3. 

In  the  mixed  (not  ergodic)  case  if 

,L  PiLi 


and  the  entropies  of  the  components  are  > H2  > •••>//» 
we  have  the 


Theorem:  Lim  = <p(q)  is  a decreasing  step  function, 

N—>co  TV 


8—1  » 
<p(q)  = Hs  in  the  interval  < q a*. 


Appendixes 




To  prove  theorems  5 and  6 first  note  that  FN  is  monotonic  de- 
creasing because  increasing  N adds  a subscript  to  a conditional 
entropy.  A simple  substitution  for  pBi(Sj)  in  the  definition  of  FN 
shows  that 

Fn  = NGn-  (N  — 1)  Gs-! 

and  summing  this  for  all  N gives  Un  = -v2F-  Hence  Gn 

> Fn  and  Gn  monotonic  decreasing.  Also  they  must  approach 
the  same  limit.  By  using  Theorem  3 we  see  that  Lim  Gn  = H. 


Appendix  4-  Maximizing  the  Rate  for  a System  of  Constraints 


Suppose  we  have  a set  of  constraints  on  sequences  of  symbols 
that  is  of  the  finite  state  type  and  can  be  represented  therefore 
by  a linear  graph,  as  in  Fig.  2.  Let  Iff  be  the  lengths  of  the  vari- 
ous symbols  that  can  occur  in  passing  from  state  i to  state  j. 
What  distribution  of  probabilities  Pi  for  the  different  states  and 
pff  for  choosing  symbol  s in  state  i and  going  to  state  j maxi- 
mizes the  rate  of  generating  information  under  these  constraints? 
The  constraints  define  a discrete  channel  and  the  maximum  rate 
must  be  less  than  or  equal  to  the  capacity  C of  this  channel, 
since  if  all  blocks  of  large  length  were  equally  likely,  this  rate 
would  result,  and  if  possible  this  would  be  best.  We  will  show 
that  this  rate  can  be  achieved  by  proper  choice  of  the  Pi  and  pff. 
The  rate  in  question  is 

- 22  Pipff  log  pff 


Let 


> ' p /(*> 

JL-J  L iJ)ii  Lij 


( s ) Bj 

pi>'  = b7 


w-‘J 


(«> 


where  the  Bi  satisfy  the  equations 

Bi  = 'LBjW-1?. 


This  homogeneous  system  has  a non-vanishing  solution  since  W 
is  such  that  the  determinant  of  the  coefficients  is  zero: 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


E - s„ 


= o. 


The  pff  defined  thus  are  satisfactory  transition  probabilities  for 
in  the  first  place, 


W~ 


,(•> 




so  that  the  sum  of  the  probabilities  from  any  particular  junction 
point  is  unity.  Furthermore  they  are  non-negative  as  can  be  seen 
from  a consideration  of  the  quantities  Ai  given  in  Appendix  1. 
The  Ai  are  necessarily  non-negative  and  the  satisfy  a similar 
system  of  equations  but  with  i and  j interchanged.  This  amounts 
to  reversing  the  orientation  on  the  lines  of  the  graph. 

Substituting  the  assumed  values  of  p-®*  in  the  general  equation 
for  the  rate  we  obtain 


s P<pf  log  -Ji  W~W 
ZP.Vukj 

log  - Zfipjf  log  B,  + XP.'pf  log  B, 


= log  W = C. 


2 PiPijl 


(«) 

ij 


Hence  the  rate  with  this  set  of  transition  probabilities  is  C and 
since  this  rate  could  never  be  exceeded  this  is  the  maximum. 


Appendix  5 

Let  Si  be  any  measurable  subset  of  the  g ensemble,  and  S2  the 
subset  of  the  / ensemble  which  gives  Si  under  the  operation  T. 
Then 

Si  = ts2 . 


Let  Hx  be  the  operator  which  shifts  all  functions  in  a set  by  the 
time  A.  Then 


HxSi  = HxTS2  = THxS2 


Appendixes 




since  T is  invariant  and  therefore  commutes  with  Hx.  Hence  if 
m [S]  is  the  probability  measure  of  the  set  S 

m[H*S  i]  = m[THxS2]  = m[H*St] 

= m[S2]  = m[Si] 


where  the  second  equality  is  by  definition  of  measure  in  the  g 
space,  the  third  since  the  / ensemble  is  stationary,  and  the  last 
by  definition  of  g measure  again.  This  shows  that  the  g ensemble 
is  stationary. 

To  prove  that  the  ergodic  property  is  preserved  under  invariant 
operations,  let  Sx  be  a subset  of  the  g ensemble  which  is  invariant 
under  Hx,  and  let  S2  be  the  set  of  all  functions  / which  transform 
into  Si.  Then 

H*Si  = H*TS2  = TH*S2  = Si 
so  that  HxS2  is  included  in  S2  for  all  A.  Now,  since 

m[i/xS2]  = m[St]  = m[Si] 

this  implies 

XS2  = S2 


for  all  A with  m[S2]  0,  1.  This  contradiction  shows  that  Si  does 

not  exist. 


Appendix  6 

The  upper  bound,  N3  < N i + AT2,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
maximum  possible  entropy  for  a power  Nx  + iV2  occurs  when  we 
have  a white  noise  of  this  power.  In  this  case  the  entropy  power  is 
N^N,. 

To  obtain  the  lower  bound,  suppose  we  have  two  distributions 
in  n dimensions  p(xi)  and  q{Xi)  with  entropy  powers  Nx  and  N2. 
What  form  should  p and  q have  to  minimize  the  entropy  power 
N3  of  their  convolution  r(xi) : 

r(Xi)  = Jp(yi)q(Xi  - yi)  dyi. 

The  entropy  H3  of  r is  given  by 

Hz  = — fr(Xi ) log  r(Xi ) dxi. 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


We  wish  to  minimize  this  subject  to  the  constraints 

#i  = — J p(Xi ) log  p(xi ) dxi 
H2  = — f q(Xi)  log  q(xi)  dx^ 

We  consider  then 

U = — f [r(x)  log  r(x)  + X p(x ) log  p(x)  + y.q(x)  log  <7(0:)]  dx 

8U  = - I [[1  + log  r(a;)]  8r(x)  + X [1  + log  p(x)]  8p(x) 

+ m[1  + l°g  q(x)  5#(:r)]]  dx. 

If  p(x)  is  varied  at  a particular  argument  Xi  = Si,  the  variation 
in  r(x)  is 

8r(x)  = q(Xi  — s») 

and 

8U  = — J q(Xi  — Si)  log  r(Xi ) dxi  — \ log  p(Si)  = 0 

and  similarly  when  q is  varied.  Hence  the  conditions  for  a mini- 
mum are 

J q(Xi  - Si)  log  r(xi)  = - X log  p(si) 

jp{Xi  — Si)  log  r(Xi)  = - m log  q(Si). 

If  we  multiply  the  first  by  p(si)  and  the  second  by  q(si)  and 
integrate  with  respect  to  s we  obtain 

H3=  -\H1 
H3  = - yH2 

or  solving  for  X and  /x  and  replacing  in  the  equations 

Hi  j q(Xi  — Si)  log  r(Xi)  dxi  = — H3  log  p(si) 

Hz  J p(xi  — Si)  log  r(xi)  dxi  = — Hz  log  p{sl). 

Now  suppose  p{Xi)  and  q(xi)  are  normal 

I A ■ • l"^2 

PM  = '/0lf^/g  - exp  - \ 2 AnXiXj 


q(Xi)  = 


(2T)n'2 

Bij  I"/2 


(2tt) 


n/2 


exp  — | ’ZBijXiXj. 


Appendixes 


m 


Then  r{x{)  will  also  be  normal  with  quadratic  form  Cij.  If  the 
inverses  of  these  forms  are  an,  bij,  cn  then 

Cjj  a i j I b-ij. 


We  wish  to  show  that  these  functions  satisfy  the  minimizing  con- 
ditions if  and  only  if  an  = Kbij  and  thus  give  the  minimum  Hz 
under  the  constraints.  First  we  have 


71  1 

log  r(Xi)  = — \0g^-\  Cij  I - I ZCijXiXj 
J q(xi  — Si ) log  r(xi)  = ~^~  1°6  ~^7  I I — h 2C», •«»«,•  — ? 2 Cijbij. 
This  should  equal 


Ht 

H i 


2 2 AijSiSj 


which  requires  An  = 

In  this  case  An  = 
identities. 


H ! 

Ht 

Hr 


H, 


C ■ 

ij. 

Bn  and  both  equations  reduce  to 


Appendix  7 

The  following  will  indicate  a more  general  and  more  rigorous 
approach  to  the  central  definitions  of  communication  theory. 
Consider  a probability  measure  space  whose  elements  are  ordered 
pairs  (x,  y) . The  variables  x,  y are  to  be  identified  as  the  possible 
transmitted  and  received  signals  of  some  long  duration  T.  Let  us 
call  the  set  of  all  points  whose  x belongs  to  a subset  <Si  of  x points 
the  strip  over  Slf  and  similarly  the  set  whose  y belong  to  S2  the 
strip  over  <S2.  We  divide  x and  y into  a collection  of  non-over- 
lapping measurable  subsets  and  Yi  approximate  to  the  rate 
of  transmission  R by 

n log 

where 

P(Xi)  is  the  probability  measure  of  the  strip  over  Xj 
P(Yi)  is  the  probability  measure  of  the  strip  over  F» 




The  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication 


P(Xi,  Y i)  is  the  probability  measure  of  the  intersection  of  the 
strips. 

A further  subdivision  can  never  decrease  Rx.  For  let  Xx  be 
divided  into  Xx  = X[  + X'{  and  let 

P(Y1)  = a P(X0  = b + c 

P(X[)  = b P(X[,  Fi)  = d 

P{X[)  = c P(X%  Fi)  = e 


P(Xh  Yx)  = d + e. 

Then  in  the  sum  we  have  replaced  (for  the  Xu  Fx  intersection) 

d -\-  6 


{d  + e)  log 


a(b  c) 


by  d log  + e log 


ac 


It  is  easily  shown  that  with  the  limitation  we  have  on  b,  c,  d,  e, 

r d + e "ld+e<-  dd‘ee 

L b + c J ~ bdce 

and  consequently  the  sum  is  increased.  Thus  the  various  possible 
subdivisions  form  a directed  set,  with  R monotonic  increasing 
with  refinement  of  the  subdivision.  We  may  define  R unambig- 
uously as  the  least  upper  bound  for  the  Ri  and  write  it 

R = JJP(X’  ^ l0g  P(x)P(y)  dX  dy‘ 


This  integral,  understood  in  the  above  sense,  includes  both  the 
continuous  and  discrete  cases  and  of  course  many  others  which 
cannot  be  represented  in  either -form.  It  is  trivial  in  this  formu- 
lation that  if  x and  u are  in  one-to-one  correspondence,  the  rate 
from  u to  y is  equal  to  that  from  x to  y.  If  v is  any  function  of  y 
(not  necessarily  with  an  inverse)  then  the  rate  from  x to  y is 
greater  than  or  equal  to  that  from  x to  v since,  in  the  calculation 
of  the  approximations,  the  subdivisions  of  y are  essentially  a 
finer  subdivision  of  those  for  v.  More  generally  if  y and  v are 
related  not  functionally  but  statistically,  i.e.,  we  have  a prob- 
ability measure  space  ( y,v ),  then  R(x,v)  < R(x,y).  This  means 
that  any  operation  applied  to  the  received  signal,  even  though  it 
involves  statistical  elements,  does  not  increase  R. 

Another  notion  which  should  be  defined  precisely  in  an  ab- 


Appendixes 




stract  formulation  of  the  theory  is  that  of  “dimension  rate,” 
that  is  the  average  number  of  dimensions  required  per  second 
to  specify  a member  of  an  ensemble.  In  the  band  limited  case 
2 W numbers  per  second  are  sufficient.  A general  definition  can 
be  framed  as  follows.  Let  fa(t)  be  an  ensemble  of  functions  and 
let  prifait),  f$(t)]  be  a metric  measuring  the  “distance”  from  fa 
to/,9  over  the  time  T (for  example  the  R.M.S.  discrepancy  over 
this  interval).  Let  iV(c,  8,  T ) be  the  least  number  of  elements/ 
which  can  be  chosen  such  that  all  elements  of  the  ensemble 
apart  from  a set  of  measure  8 are  within  the  distance  e of  at 
least  one  of  those  chosen.  Thus  we  are  covering  the  space  to 
within  e apart  from  a set  of  small  measure  8.  We  define  the 
dimension  rate  X for  the  ensemble  by  the  triple  limit 


X = Lim  Lim  Lim 

a->o  €->o  t->  oo 


log  #(«,  3,  T) 
T log  e 


This  is  a generalization  of  the  measure  type  definitions  of  dimen- 
sion in  topology,  and  agrees  with  the  intuitive  dimension  rate  for 
simple  ensembles  where  the  desired  result  is  obvious. 


