Communication in the Presence of Noise*
CLAUDE E. SHANNONt, MEMBER, IRE
Summary-A method is developed for representing any com-
munication system geometrically. Messages and the corresponding
signals are points in two "function spaces," and the modulation
process is a mapping of one space into the other. Using this repre-
sentation, a number of results in communication theory are deduced
concerning expansion and compression
of bandwidth and the
threshold effect. Formulas are found for the maxmum rate of trans-
mission of binary digits over a system when the signal is perturbed
by various types of noise. Some of the properties of "ideal" systems
which transmit at this maxmum rate are discussed. The equivalent
number of binary digits per second for certain information sources
is calculated.
* Decimal classification: 621.38. Original manuscript received by
the Institute, July 23, 1940. Presented, 1948 IRE National Conven-
tion, New York, N. Y., March 24, 1948; and IRE New York Section,
New York, N. Y., November 12, 1947.
t Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
GENERAL COMMUNICATIONS
system
is
shown schematically in Fig. 1. It consists essen-
tially of five elements.
1. An information source. The source selects one mes-
sage from a set of possible messages to be transmitted to
the receiving terminal. The message may be of various
types; for example, a sequence of letters or numbers, as
in telegraphy or teletype, or a continuous function of
timef(t), as in radio or telephony.
2. The transmitter. This operates on the message in
some way and produces a signal suitable for transmis-
sion to the receiving point over the channel. In teleph-
January
Shannon: Commiunication in the Presence of Noise
ony, this operation consists of merely changing sound
pressure into a proportional electrical current. In teleg-
the channel capacity may be defined as
C9g2 M
T
,=
-oo
T
T--a
T
Fig. 1-General communications system.
raphy, we have an encoding operation which produces a
sequence of dots, dashes, and spaces corresponding to
the letters of the message. To take a more complex
example, in the case of multiplex PCM telephony the
different speech functions must be sampled, compressed,
quantized and encoded, and finally interleaved properly
to construct the signal.
3. The channel. This is merely the medium used to
transmit the signal from the transmitting to the receiv-
ing point. It may be a pair of wires, a coaxial cable, a
band of radio frequencies, etc. During transmission, or
at the receiving terminal, the signal may be perturbed
by noise or distortion. Noise and distortion may be dif-
ferentiated on the basis that distortion is a fixed opera-
tion applied to the signal, while noise involves statistical
and unpredictable
perturbations.
Distortion
can,
in
principle, be corrected by applying the inverse opera-
tion, while a perturbation due to noise cannot always be
removed, since the signal does not always undergo the
same change during transmission.
4. The receiver. This operates on the received signal
and attempts to reproduce, from it, the original mes--
sage. Ordinarily it will perform approximately the math-
ematical inverse of the operations of the transmitter, al-
though they may differ somewhat with best design in
order to combat noise.
5. The destination.
This is the person or thing for
whom the message is intended.
Following Nyquist' and Hartley,2 it is convenient to
use a logarithmic measure of information. If a device has
n possible positions it can, by definition, store logbn units
of information. The choice of the base b amounts to a
choice of unit, since logb n = logb c log, n. We will use the
base 2 and call the resulting units binary digits or bits.
A group of m relays or flip-flop circuits has 2'" possible
sets of positions, and can therefore store log2 2m = m bits.
If it is possible to distinguish reliably M different sig-
nal functions of duration T on a channel, we can say
that the channel can transmit log2 M bits in time T. The
rate of transmission is then log2 M/T. More precisely,
1 H. Nyquist,
"Certain factors affecting telegraph speed," Bell
Syst. Tech. Jour., vol. 3, p. 324; April, 1924.
2 R. V. L. Hartley, "The transmission of information," Bell Sys.
Tech. Jour., vol. 3, p. 535-564; July, 1928.
A precise meaning will be given later to the requirement
of reliable resolution of the M signals.
II. THE SAMPLING THEOREM
Let us suppose that the channel has a certain band-
width W in cps starting at zero frequency, and that we
are allowed to use this channel for a certain period of
time T. Without any further restrictions this would
mean that we can use as signal functions any functions
of time whose spectra lie entirely within the band W,
and whose time functions lie within the interval T. Al-
though it is not possible to fulfill both of these condi-
tions exactly, it is possible to keep the spectrum within
the band W, and to have the time function very small
outside the interval T. Can we describe in a more useful
way the functions which satisfy these conditions? One
answer is the following:
THEOREM 1: If a function f(t) contains no frequencies
higher than W cps, it is completely determined by giving
its ordinates at a series of points spaced 1/2W seconds
apart.
This is a fact which is common knowledge in the com-
munication art. The intuitive justification is that, if f(t)
contains
no
frequencies
higher than
W,
it
cannot
change to a substantially new value in a time less than
one-half cycle of the highest frequency, that is, 1/2 W. A
mathematical proof showing that this is not onily ap-
proximately, but exactly, true can be given as follows.
Let F(w) be the spectrum of f(t). Then
a00
f(t) =
2f7(
)eF(w,)eitdw
+29rW
=
F(w)ewtodco,
-1_2iW
(2)
(3)
since F(c) is assumed zero outside the band W. If we
let
n
t=-2W
(4)
where n is any positive or negative integer, we obtain
f(2T) = 27r 2W7F(w)ei-2W do.
(5)
On the left are the values of f(t) at the sampling points.
The integral on the right will be recognized as essen-
tially the nth coefficient in a Fourier-series expansion of
the function F(w), taking the interval
- W to + W as a
fundamental period. This means that the values of the
samples f(n2W) determine the Fourier coefficients in
the series expansion of F(w). Thus they determine F(w,),
since F(w) is zero for frequencies greater than W, and for
(1)
1949
lower frequencies F(c) is determined if its Fourier co-
efficients are determined. But F(w) determines the origi-
nal function f(t) completely, since a function is deter-
mined if its spectrum is known. Therefore the original
samples determine the function f(t) completely. There
is one and only one function whose spectrum is limited
to a band W, and which passes through given values at
sampling points'separated 1/2W seconds apart. The
function can be simply reconstructed from the samples
by using a pulse of the type
sin 2irWt
2irWt
(6)
This function is unity at t = 0 and zero at t = n/2 W, i.e.,
at all other sample points. Furthermore, its spectrum is
constant in the band W and zero outside. At each sam-
ple point a pulse of this type is placed whose amplitude
is adjusted to equal that of the sample. The sum of these
pulses is the required function, since it satisfies the con-
ditions on the spectrum and passes through the sampled
values.
Mathematically, this process can be described as fol-
lows. Let x. be the nth sample. Then the function f(t)
is represented by
f(t) =E
n=-oo
sin 7r(2Wt - n)
X7r(2Wt - n)
(7)
A similar result is true if the band W does not start at
zero frequency but at some higher value, and can be
proved by a linear translation (corresponding physically
to single-sideband modulation) of the zero-frequency
case. In this case the elementary pulse is obtained from
sin x/x by single-side-band modulation.
If the function is limited to the time interval T and
the samples are spaced 1/2W seconds apart, there will
be a total of 2TW samples in the interval. All samples
outside will be substantially zero. To be more precise,
we can define a function to be limited to the time inter-
val T if, and only if, all the samples outside this interval
are exactly zero. Then we can say that any function lim-
ited to the bandwidth W and the time interval T can be
specified by giving 2TW numbers.
Theorem 1 has been given previously in other forms
by mathematicians' but in spite of its evident impor-
tance seems not to have appeared explicitly in the litera-
ture of communication theory. Nyquist,4'5 however, and
more recently Gabor,6 have pointed out that approxi-
mately 2TW numbers are sufficient, basing their argu-
I J. M. Whittaker, "Interpolatory Function Theory," Cambridge
Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, No. 33, Cam-
bridge University Press, Chapt. IV; 1935.
4 H. Nyquist, 'Certain topics in telegraph transmission theory,"
A.I.E.E. Transactions, p. 617; April, 1928.
6 W. R. Bennett,
"Time division multiplex systems," Bell Sys.
Tech. Jour., vol. 20, p. 199; April, 1941, where a result similar to
Theorem 1 is established, but on a steady-state basis.
6 D. Gabor, "Theory of communication," Jour. I.E.E. (London),
vol. 93; part 3, no. 26, p. 429; 1946.
ments on a Fourier series expansion of the function over
the time interval T. This gives TW sine and (TW+ 1)
cosine terms up to frequency W. The slight discrepancy
is due to the fact that the functions obtained in this way
will not be strictly limited to the band W but, because
of the sudden starting and stopping of the sine and co-
sine components, contain some frequency content out-
side the band. Nyquist pointed out the fundamental
importance of the time interval 1/2W seconds in con-
nection with telegraphy, and we will call this the Ny-
quist interval corresponding to the band W.
The 2TW numbers used to specify the function need
not be the equally spaced samples used above. For ex-
ample, the samples can be unevenly spaced, although, if
there is considerable bunching, the samples must be
known very accurately to give a good reconstruction of
the function. The reconstruction process is also more
involved with unequal spacing. One can further show
that the value of the function and its derivative at every
other sample point are sufficient. The value and first and
second derivatives at every third sample point give a
still different set of parameters which uniquely deter-
mine the function. Generally speaking, any set of 2TW
independent numbers associated with the function can
be used to describe it.
III. GEOMETRICAL REPRESENTATION OF
THE SIGNALS
A set of three numbers x1, X2, x3, regardless of their
source, can always be thought of as co-ordinates of a
point in three-dimensional space. Similarly, the 2TW
evenly spaced samples of a signal can be thought of as
co-ordinates of a point in a space of 2TW dimensions.
Each particular selection of these numbers corresponds
to a particular point in this space. Thus there is exactly
one point corresponding to each signal in the band W
and with duration T.
The number of dimensions 2TW will be, in general,
very high. A 5-Mc television signal lasting for an hour
would be represented by a point in a space with 2 X5
X 106X602=3.6X101
dimensions.
Needless
to
say,
such a space cannot be visualized. It is possible, how-
ever, to study analytically the properties of n-dimen-
sional space. To a considerable extent, these properties
are a simple generalization of the properties of two- and
three-dimensional space, and can often be arrived at
by inductive reasoning from these cases. The advantage
of this geometrical representation of the signals is that
we can use the vocabulary and the results of geometry
in the communication problem. Essentially, we have re-
placed a complex entity (say, a television signal) in a
simple environment (the signal requires only a plane for
its representation as f(t)) by a simple entity (a point) in
a complex environment (2TW dimensional space).
If we imagine the 2TW co-ordinate axes to be at right
angles to each other, then distances in the space have a
simple interpretation. The distance from the origin to a
January
Shannon: Communication in the Presence of Noise
point is analogous to the two- and three-dimensional
cases
2TW
d
E X 2
(8)
n=1
where x,, is the nth sample. Now, since
2TW
sin ir(2Wt - n)
f(t)1:
x,
~~~~~~~(9)
n=1
r(2 Wt - n)
we have
00f(t)2dt
W E X 2
(10)
using the fact that
X sin ir(2Wt-m)
sin ir(2Wt-n)
,
-~~~~~~~~dt
co
r(2Wt- m)
7r(Wt-n)
0 m
n
= d 1
(11)
d-m= n.
,2W
Hence, the square of the distance to a point is 2W times
the energy (more precisely, the energy into a unit resist-
ance) of the corresponding signal
d2= 2WE
= 2WTP
(12)
where P is the average power over the time T. Similarly,
the distance between two points is
;2W] times the
rms discrepancy between the two corresponding signals.
If we consider only signals whose average power is less
than P, these will correspond to points within a sphere
of radius
r = V/2WTP.
(13)
If noise is added to the signal in transmission,
it
means that the point corresponding to the signal has
been moved a certain distance in the space proportional
to the rms value of the noise. Thus noise produces a
small region of uncertainty about each point in the
space. A fixed distortion in the channel corresponds to
a warping of the space, so that each point is moved, but
in a definite fixed way.
In ordinary three-dimensional space it is possible to
set up many different co-ordinate systems. This is also
possible in the signal space of 2TW dimensions that we
are considering. A different co-ordinate system
cor-
responds to a different way of describing the same sig-
nal function. The various ways of specifying a function
given above are special cases of this. One other way of
particular importance in communication is in terms of
frequency components. The function f(t) can be ex-
panded as a sum of sines and cosines of frequencies I/T
apart, and the coefficients used as a different set of co-
ordinates. It can be shown that these-co-ordinates are
all perpendicular to each other and are obtained by
what is essentially a rotation of the original co-ordinate
system.
Passing a signal through an ideal filter corresponds to
projecting the corresponding point onto a certain region
in the space. In fact, in the frequency-co-ordinate sys-
tem those components lying in the pass band of the filter
are retained and those outside are eliminated, so that
the projection is on one of the co-ordinate lines, planes,
or hyperplanes. Any filter performs a linear operation on
the vectors of the space, producing a new vector lin-
early related to the old one.
IV. GEOMETRICAL REPRESENTATION
OF MESSAGES
We have associated a space of 2TW dimensions with
the set of possible signals. In a similar way one can as-
sociate a space with the set of possible messages. Sup-
pose we are considering a speech system and that the
messages consist of all possible sounds which contain no
frequencies over a certain limit W1 and last for a time
T1.
Just as for the case of the signals, these messages can
be represented in a one-to-one way in a space of 27T7W1
dimensions. There are several points to be noted, how-
ever. In the first place, various different points may rep-
resent the same message, insofar as the final destination
is concerned. For example, in the case of speech, the ear
is insensitive to a certain amount of phase distortion.
Messages differing only in the phases of their compon-
ents (to a limited extent) sound the same. This may have
the effect of reducing the number of essential dimensions
in the message space. All the points which are equivalent
for the destination can be grouped together and treated
as one point. It may then require fewer numbers to
specify one of these "equivalence classes" than to spec-
ify an arbitrary point. For example, in Fig. 2 we have a
two-dimensional space, the set of points in a square. If
all points on a circle are regarded as equivalent, it re-
duces to a one-dimensional space-a point can now be
Fig. 2-Reduction of dimensionality through
equivalence classes.
specified by one number, the radius of the circle. In the
case of sounds, if the ear were completely insensitive to
phase, then the number of dimensions would be reduced
by one-half due to this cause alone. The sine and cosine
components an and b, for a given frequency would not
need to be specified independently, but only Van2+bn2;
that is, the total amplitude for this frequency. The re-
1949
duction in frequency discrimination of the ear as fre-
quency increases indicates that a further reduction in
dimensionality occurs. The vocoder makes use to a con-
siderable extent of these equivalences among speech
sounds, in the first place by eliminating, to a large de-
gree, phase information, and in the second place by
lumping groups of frequencies together, particularly at
the higher frequencies.
In other types of communication there may not be
any equivalence classes of this type. The final destina-
tion is sensitive to any change in the message within the
full message space of 2T1Wi dimensions. This appears
to be the case in television transmission.
A second point to be noted is that the information
source may put certain restrictions on the actual mes-
sages. The space of 2TI14
dimensions contains a point
for every function of time f(t) limited to the band WI and
of duration T1. The class of messages we wish to trans-
mit may be only a small subset of these functions. For
example, speech sounds must be produced by the human
vocal system. If we are willing to forego the transmission
of any other sounds, the effective dimensionality may be
considerably
decreased. A
similar
effect can
occur
through probability considerations. Certain, messages
may be possible, but so improbable relative to the oth-
ers that we can, in a certain sense, neglect them. In a
television image, for example, successive frames are
likely to be very nearly identical. There is a fair proba-
bility of a particular picture element having the same
light intensity in successive frames. If this is analyzed
mathematically, it results in an effective reduction of
dimensionality of the message space when T1 is large.
We will not go further into these two effects at pres-
ent, but let us suppose that, when they are taken into
account, the resulting message space has a dimensional-
ity D, which will, of course, be less than or equal to
2T1W1. In many cases, even though the effects are pres-
ent, their utilization involves too much complication in
the way of equipment. The system is then designed on
the basis that all functions are different and that there
are no limitations on the information source. In this
case, the message space is considered to have the full
2 T1W1 dimensions.
V. GEOMETRICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE
TRANSMITTER AND RECEIVER
We now consider the function of the transmitter from
this geometrical standpoint. The input to the transmit-
ter is a message; that is, one point in the message space.
Its output is a signal-one point in the signal space.
Whatever form of encoding or modulation is performed,
the transmitter must establish some correspondence be-
tween the points in the two spaces. Every point in the
message space must correspond to a point in the signal
space, and no two messages can correspond to the same
signal. If they did, there would be no way to determine
at the receiver which of the two messages was intended.
The geometrical name for such a correspondence is a
mapping. The transmitter maps the message space into
the signal space.
In a similar way, the receiver maps the signal space
back into the message space. Here, however, it is possi-
ble to have more than one point mapped into the same
point. This means that several different signals are de-
modulated or decoded into the same message. In AM,
for example, the phase of the carrier is lost in demodula-
tion. Different signals which differ only in the phase of
the carrier are demodulated into the same message. In
FM the shape of the signal wave above the limiting
value of the limiter does not affect the recovered mes-
sage. In PCM considerable distortion of the received
pulses is possible, with no effect on the output of the re-
ceiver.
We have so far established a correspondence between
a communication system and certain geometrical ideas.
The correspondence is summarized in Table I.
TABLE I
Communication System
The set of possible signals
A particular signal
Distortion in the channel
Noise in the channel
The average power of the
signal
The set of signals of power
p
The set of possible messages
The set of actual messages
distinguishable
by
the
destination
A message
The transmitter
The receiver
Geometrical Entity
A space of 2TW dimensions
A point in the space
A warping of the space
A region of uncertainty about each
point
(2TW)-I times the square of the dis-
tance from the origin to the point
The set of points in a sphere of radius
'V2TW P
A space of 2T1W1 dimensions
A space of D dimensions obtained by
regarding all equivalent messages
as one point, and deleting messages
which the source could not produce
A point in this space
A mapping of the message space into
the signal space
A mapping of the signal space into
the message space
VI. MAPPING CONSIDERATIONS
It is possible to draw certain conclusions of a general
nature regarding modulation methods from the geo-
metrical picture alone. Mathematically, the simplest
types of mappings are those in which the two spaces
have the same number of dimensions. Single-sideband
amplitude modulation is an example of this type and an
especially simple one, since the co-ordinates in the sig-
nal space are proportional to the corresponding co-ordi-
nates in the message space. In double-sideband trans-
mission the signal space has twice the number of co-
ordinates, but they occur in pairs with equal values. If
there were only one dimension in the message space and
two in the signal space, it would correspond to mapping
a line onto a square so that the point x on the line is rep-
resented by (x, x) in the square. Thus no significant use
is made of the extra dimensions. All the messages go into
a subspace having only 2 T1 WI1 dimensions.
In frequency modulation the mapping is more in-
volved. The signal space has a much larger dimensional-
January
Shannon: Communication in the Presence of Noise
ity than the message space. The type of mapping can be
suggested by Fig. 3, where a line is mapped into a three-
dimensional space. The line starts at unit distance from
TO NEXT COORDINATE
3-
Fig. 3-Mapping similar to frequency modulation.
the origin on the first co-ordinate axis, stays at this dis-
tance from the origin on a circle to the next co-ordinate
axis, and then goes to the third. It can be seen that the
line is lengthened in this mapping in proportion to the
total number of co-ordinates. It is not, however, nearly
as long as it could be if it wound back and forth through
the space, filling up the internal volume of the sphere it
traverses.
This expansion of the line is related to the improved
signal-to-noise ratio obtainable with increased band-
width. Since the noise produces a small region of uncer-
tainty about each point, the effect of this on the recov-
UNCERTAINTY
DUE
TO NOISE
Fig. 4-Efficient mapping of a line into a square.
ered message will be less if the map is in a large scale. To
obtain as large a scale as possible requires that the line
wander back and forth through the higher-dimensional
region as indicated in Fig. 4, where we have mapped a
line into a square. It will be noticed that when this is
done the effect of noise is small relative to the length of
the line, provided the noise is less than a certain critical
value. At this value it becomes uncertain at the receiver
as to which portion of the line contains the message.
This holds generally, and it shows that any system which
attempts to use the capacities of a wider band to the full ex-
tent possible will suffer from a threshold effect when there
is noise. If the noise is small, very little distortion will
occur, but at some critical noise amplitude the message
will become very badly distorted. This effect is well
known in PCM.
Suppose, on the other hand, we wish to reduce di-
mensionality, i.e., to compress bandwidth or time or
both. That is, we wish to send messages of band W1 and
duration T1 over a channel with TW<T1 W1. It has al-
ready been indicated that the effective dimensionality D
of the message space may be less than 2T1WI due to the
properties of the source and of the destination. Hence we
certainly need no more than D dimension in the signal
space for a good mapping. To make this saving it is nec-
essary, of course, to isolate the effective co-ordinates in
the message space, and to send these only. The reduced
bandwidth transmission of speech by the vocoder is a
case of this kind.
The question arises, however, as to whether further
reduction is possible. In our geometrical analogy, is it
possible to map a space of high dimensionality onto one
of lower dimensionality? The answer is that it is pos i-
ble, with certain reservations. For example, the points of
a square can be described by their two co-ordinates
which could be written in decimal notation
x = .a1a2a3
. . .1
y = .b1b2b3
*
* .
From these two numbers we can construct one number
by taking digits alternately from x and y:
z =
. alb1a2b2a3b3
*
-
-
(15)
A knowledge of x and y determines z, and z determines
both x and y. Thus there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the points of a square and the points of a line.
This type of mapping, due to the mathematician
Cantor, can easily be extended as far as we wish in the
direction of reducing dimensionality. A space of n di-
mensions can be mapped in a one-to-one way into a
space of one dimension. Physically, this means that the
frequency-time product can be reduced as far as we wish
when there is no noise, with exact recovery of the origi-
nal messages.
In a less exact sense, a mapping of the type shown in
Fig. 4 maps a square into a line, provided we are not too
particular about recovering exactly the starting point,
but are satisfied with a near-by one. The sensitivity we
noticed before when increasing dimensionality now takes
a different form. In such a mapping, to reduce TW, there
will be a certain threshold effect when we perturb the
message. As we change the message a small amount, the
corresponding signal will change a small amount, until
some critical value is reached. At this point the signal
will undergo a considerable change. In topology it is
shown7 that it is not possible to map a region of higher
dimension into a region of lower dimension continuously.
It is the necessary discontinuity which produces the
threshold effects we have been describing for communi-
cation systems.
7W. Hurewitz and H. Waltman, 'Dimemion Theory,n Prinpeton
University Press, Prinr,ton, N. 1.; 1941,
1949
This discussion is relevant to the well-known "Hartley
Law," which states that
"
.
.
. an upper limit to the
amount of information which may be transmitted is set
by the sum for the various available lines of the product
of the line-frequency range of each by the tifie during
which it is available for use."2 There is a sense in which
this statement is true, and another sense in which it is
false. It is not possible to map the message space into
the signal space in a one-to-one, continuous manner
(this is known mathematically as a topological mapping)
unless the two spaces have the same dimensionality;
i.e., unless D =2TW. Hence, if we limit the transmitter
and receiver to continuous one-to-one operations, there
is a lower bound to the product TW in the channel.
This lower bound is determined, not by the product
W1Tj of message bandwidth and time, but by the num-
ber of essential dimension D, as indicated in Section IV.
There is, however, no good reason for limiting the trans-
mitter and receiver to topological mappings. In fact,
PCM and similar modulation systems are highly dis-
continuous and come very close to the type of mapping
given by (14) and (15).
It is desirable, then, to find
limits for what can be done with no restrictions on the
type
of transmitter and
receiver
operations.
These
limits, which will be derived in the following sections,
depend on the amount and nature of the noise in the
channel, and on the transmitter power, as well as on
the bandwidth-time product.
It is evident that any system, either to compress TW,
or to expand it and make full use of the additional vol-
ume, must be highly nonlinear in character and fairly
complex because of the peculiar nature of the mappings
involved.
VII. THE CAPACITY OF A CHANNEL IN THE
PRESENCE OF WHITE THERMAL NOISE
It is not difficult to set up certain quantitative rela-
tions that must hold when we change the product TW.
Let us assume, for the present, that the noise in the sys-
tem is a white thermal-noise band limited to the band
W, and that it is added to the transmitted signal to pro-
duce the received signal. A white thermal noise has the
property that each sample is perturbed independently of
all the others, and the distribution of each amplitude is
Gaussian with standard deviation o =,\N where N is
the average noise power. How many different signals can
be distinguished at the receiving point in spite of the
perturbations due to noise? A crude estimate can be ob-
tained as follows. If the signal has a power P, then the
perturbed signal will have a power P+N. The number
of amplitudes that can be reasonably well distinguished
is
K
/+N
(16)
where K is a small constant in the neighborhood of unity
depending on how the phrase "reasonably well" is inter-
preted. If we require very good separation, K will be
small, while toleration of occasional errors allows K to
be larger. Since in time T there are 2TW independent
amplitudes, the total number of reasonably distinct sig-
nals is
_P +N
yn2TW
M=
K
(17)
The number of bits that can be sent in this time is
log2 M, and the rate of transmission is
log2 M _P±Nl
= W log2 K2
(bits per second).
(18)
The difficulty with this argument, apart from
its
general approximate character, lies in the tacit assump-
tion that for two signals to be distinguishable they must
differ at some sampling point by more than the expected
noise. The argument presupposes that PCM, or some-
thing very similar to PCM, is the best method of en-
coding binary digits into signals. Actually, two signals
can be reliably distinguished if they differ by only a
small amount, provided this difference is sustained over
a long period of time. Each sample of the received signal
then gives a small amount of statistical information
concerning
the
transmitted
signal;
in combination,
these statistical indications result in near certainty.
This possibility allows an improvement of about 8 db
in power over (18) with a reasonable definition of re-
liable resolution of signals, as will appear later. We will
now make use of the geometrical representation to de-
termine the exact capacity of a noisy channel.
THEOREM 2: Let P be the average transmitter power, and
suppose the noise is white thermal noise of power N in the
band W. By sufficiently complicated encoding systems it is
possible to transmit binary digits at a rate
P+N
C = Wlog21N9(
N
with as small afrequency of errors as desired. It is not pos-
sible by any encoding method to send at a higher rate and
have an arbitrarily low frequency of errors.
This shows that the rate W log (P+N)/N measures in
a sharply defined way the capacity of the channel for
transmitting information. It is a rather surprising result,
since one would expect that reducing the frequency of
errors would require reducing the rate of transmission,
and that the rate must approach zero as the error fre-
quency does. Actually, we can send at the rate C but
reduce errors byusing more involvedencoding and longer
delays at the transmitter and receiver. The transmitter
will take long sequences of binary digits and represent
this entire sequence by a particular signal function of
long duration. The delay is required because the trans-
mitter must wait for the full sequence before the signal
is determined. Similarly, the receiver must wait for the
full signal function before decoding into binary digits.
We new prove Theorem 2. In the geometrical repre-
sentation each signal point is surrounded by a small re-
gion of uncertainty due to noise. With white thermal
noise, the perturbations of the different samples (or co-
January
(19)
Shannon: Communication in the Presence of Noise
ordinates) are all Gaussian and independent. Thus the
probability
of
a
perturbation
having
co-ordinates
X1, X2,
*
*
, xn (these are the differences between the
original and received signal co-ordinates) is the product
of the individual probabilities for the different co-ordi-
nates:
2TW
1X2
II
exp-
n=1 V27r2TWN
2TWN
-1
2TW
-
~~~~exp
Xn
(2ir2TWN)TW
2TW
Since this depends only on
2TW
EXn2
the probability of a given perturbation depends only on
the distance from the original signal and not on the direc-
tion. In other words, the region of uncertainty is spheri-
cal in nature. Although the limits of this region are not
sharply defined
for a small number
of dimensions
(2TW), the limits become more and more definite as the
dimensionality increases. This is because the square of
the distance a signal is perturbed is equal to 2TW times
the average noise power during the time T. As T in-
creases, this average noise power must approach N.
Thus, for large T, the perturbation will almost certainly
be to some point near the surface of a sphere of radius
,\2TWN centered at the original signal point. More
precisely, by taking T sufficiently large we can insure
(with probability as near to 1 as we wish) that the per-
turbation will lie within a sphere of radius V\2TW(N+e)
where e is arbitrarily small. The noise regions can there-
fore be thought of roughly as sharply defined billiard
balls, when 2TW is very large. The received signals have
an average power P+N, and in the same sense must al-
most
all
lie on the surface
of a sphere
of radius
/2TW(P+N). How many different transmitted signals
can be found which will be distinguishable? Certainly
not more than the volume of the sphere of radius
V\2TW(P+N) divided by the volume of a sphere of
radius V12TWN, since overlap of the noise spheres re-
sults in confusion as to the message at the receiving
point. The volume of an n-dimensional sphere8 of radius
r is
This proves the last statement in the theorem.
To prove the first part of the theorem, we must show
that there exists a system of encoding which transmits
W log2 (P+N)/N binary digits per second with a fre-
quency of errors less than e when e is arbitrarily small.
The system to be considered operates as follows. A long
sequence of, say, m binary digits is taken in at the trans-
mitter. There are 2m such sequences, and each corre-
sponds to a particular signal function of duration T.
Thus there are M= 2m different signal functions. When
the sequence of m is completed, the transmitter starts
sending the corresponding signal. At the receiver a per-
turbed signal is received. The receiver compares this
signal with each of the M possible transmitted signals
and selects the one which is nearest the perturbed signal
(in the sense of rms error) as the one actually sent. The
receiver then constructs, as its output, the correspond-
ing sequence of binary digits. There will be, therefore,
an over-all delay of 2 T seconds.
To insure a frequency of errors less than E, the M sig-
nal functions must be reasonably well separated from
each other. In fact, we must choose them in such a way
that, when a perturbed signal is received, the nearest
signal point (in the geometrical representation) is, with
probability greater than 1 - E, the actual original signal.
It turns out, rather surprisingly, that it is possible to
choose our M signal functions at random from the points
inside the sphere of radius V12TWP, and achieve the
most that is possible. Physically, this corresponds very
nearly to using M different samples of band-limited
white noise with power P as signal functions.
A particular selection of M points in the sphere corre-
sponds to a particular encoding system. The general
scheme of the proof is to consider all such selections, and
to show that the frequency of errors averaged over all
the particular selections is less than e. This will show
that there are particular selections in the set with fre-
quency of errors less than e. Of course, there will be
other particular selections with a high frequency of er-
rors.
The geometry is shown in Fig.
5. This is a plane
cross section through the high-dimensional sphere de-
fined by a typical transmitted signal B, received signal
A, and the origin 0. The transmitted signal will lie very
(20)
1rn/2
V =
rn
n
r -2+1,
Hence, an upper limit for the number M of distinguish-
able signals is
M<(VP +N)2TW
(21)
Consequently, the channel capacity is bounded by:
10g2M
P+N
T
1N
(22)
8 D. M. Y. Sommerville, "An Introduction to the Geometry of N
Dimensions," E. P. Dutton, Inc., New York, N. Y., 1929; p. 135.
Fig. 5-The geQmetry involved in Theorem 2.
1949
close to the surface of the sphere of radius /2T
since in a high-dimensional sphere nearly all the vol
is very close to the surface. The received signal
<
larly will lie on the surface of the sphere of ra
V\2TW(P+N). The high-dimensional lens-shapec
gion L is the region of possible signals that might I
caused A, since the distance between the transm
and received signal is almost certainly very clos
V12 TWN. L is of smaller volume than a sphere of ra
h. We can determine h by equating the area of th(
angle OAB, calculated two different ways:
2hV/2TW(P + N) -2/2TWPV\2TWN
/PN
h = V2TW
VP+ N
The probability of any particular signal point (c
than the actual cause of A) lying in L is, therefore,
than the ratio
of the volumes of spheres
of
V/2TW PN/P+N and \V2 TWP, since in our ensei
of coding systems we chose the signal points at ran
from the points in the sphere of radius \V2TWP.
ratio is
2WPN
2TW
(2TW-
,\/2TWP
N
)T
KP + N,
We have M signal points. Hence the probability p
all except the actual cause of A are outside L is grE
than
[
N
)
M-1
When these points are outside L, the signal is
i]
preted correctly. Therefore, if we make P greater
1- e, the frequency of errors will be less than e. This
be true if
[
N
T
( +M-1)
I~+
> 1-e.
'WP,
lume
simi-
idius
I re-
have
ittprl
tain an arbitrarily small frequency of errors and trans-
mit at a rate arbitrarily close to the rate C. We can also
send at the rate C with arbitrarily small e, since the ex-
tra binary digits need not be sent at all, but can be filled
in at random at the receiver. This only adds another
arbitrarily small quantity to e. This completes the proof.
'
L-;
VI I I. DISCUSSION
;e to
Ldius
We will call a system that transmits without errors at
e tri-
the rate C an ideal system. Such a system cannot be
achieved with any finite encoding process but can be
approximated as closely as desired. As we approximate
more closely to the ideal, the following effects occur: (1)
The rate of transmission of binary digits approaches
C= W log2 (1±P/N). (2) The frequency of errors ap-
proaches zero. (3) The transmitted signal approaches a
)ther
white noise in statistical properties. This is true, roughly
, less
speaking, because the various signal functions used
radii
must be distributed at random in the sphere of radius
mble
V12TWP. (4). The threshold effect becomes very sharp.
dom
If the noise is increased over the value for which the sys-
This
tem was designed, the frequency of errors increases very
rapidly. (5) The required delays at transmitter and re-
ceiver increase indefinitely. Of course, in a wide-band
system a millisecond may be substantially an infinite
delay.
(23)
In Fig. 6 the function C/W= log (1 +P/N) is plotted
with P/N in db horizontal and C! W the number of bits
that
per cycle of band vertical. The circles represent PCM
-ater
systems of the binary, ternary, etc., types, using posi-
tive and negative pulses and adjusted to give one error
in about 10O binary digits. The dots are for a PPM sys-
(24)
tem with two, three, etc., discrete positions for the pulse.9
nter-
than
s wilI
(25)
Now (1 -x)
is always greater than 1-nx when n is pos-
itive. Consequently, (25) will be true if
(26)
or if
or
(P+N) Tw
(M-13 <Cet
N
log (M-1)
P + N
loge
loTM
< W log
+-
T'
N
T
(27)
(28)
-20
-10
NLdb
cv
N
Fig. 6-Comparison of PCM and PPM
with ideal performance.
For any fixed
e, we can satisfy this by taking T suffi-
ciently large, and also have log (M- 1)/T or log M/T as
close as desired to W log P+N/N. This shows that,
with a random selection of points for signals, we can ob-
I The PCM points are calculated from formulas given in 'The
philosophy of PCM," by B. M. Oliver, J. R. Pierce, and C. E. Shan-
non, PROC. I.R.E., vol. 36, pp. 1324-1332; November, 1948. The
PPM points are from unpublished calculations of B. McMillan, who
points out that, for very small P/N, the points approach to within
3 db of the ideal curve.
January
N
TW
I
- (m
- 1)
p + N
> 1
- e
Shannon: Communication in the Presence of Noise
The difference between the series of points and the ideal
curve corresponds to the gain that could be obtained by
more involved coding systems. It amounts to about 8
db in power over most of the practical range. The series
of points and circles is about the best that can be done
without delay. Whether it is worth while to use more
complex types of modulation to obtain some of this
possible saving is, of course, a question of relative costs
and valuations.
The quantity TW log (1 +P/N\) is, for large T, the
number of bits that can be transmitted in time T. It can
be regarded as an exchange relation between the differ-
ent parameters. The individual quantities T, W, P, and
N can be altered at will without changing the amount
of information we can
transmit, provided TW log
(1 +P/N) is held constant. If TW is reduced, P/N must
be increased, etc.
Ordinarily, as we increase W, the noise power N in the
band will increase proportionally; N = N0W where No is
the noise power per cycle. In this case, we have
C = W log
Q+-)N
(29)
If we let Wo=P/No, i.e., Wo is the band for which the
noise power is equal to the signal power, this can be
written
-=-
log (1+-)
(30)
In Fig. 7, C/Wo is plotted as a function of W/Wo. As we
increase the band, the capacity increases rapidly until
the total noise power accepted is about equal to the
ASYMPTOTIC
VALUE = 1.443
z0
hiI.C.
Wo= BAND FOR
WHICH
P= N
0.
O
w/wo
Fig. 7-Channel capacity as a function of bandwidth.
signal power; after this, the increase is slow, and it ap-
proaches an asymptotic value log2 e times the capacity
for W=Wo.
IX. ARBITRARY GAUSSIAN NOISE
If a white thermal noise is passed through a filter
whose transfer function is Y(f), the resulting noise has
a power spectrum N(f) = K Y(f) 12 and
is known as
Gaussian noise. We can calculate the capacity of a chan-
nel perturbed by any Gaussian noise from the white-
noise result. Suppose our total transmitter power is P
and it is distributed among the various frequencies ac-
cording to P(f). Then
fw
P(f)df = P.
(31)
We can divide the band into a large number of small
bands, with N(f) approximately constant in each. The
total capacity for a given distribution P(f) will then be
given by
C1 = f
log (1 +
df,
(32)
since, for each elementary band, the white-noise result
applies. The maximum rate of transmission will be found
by maximizing C1 subject to condition (31). This re-
quires that we maximize
(
P(f)\
0 log
+ N())+ XP(f)Jdf.
(33)
The condition for this is, by the calculus of variations,
or merely from the convex nature of the curve log
(I+X),
N(f) ± P(f) + x = o
(34)
or N(f) +P(f) must be constant. The constant is ad-
justed to make the total signal power equal to P. For
frequencieswhere the noise power is low,the signal power
should be high, and vice versa, as we would expect.
The situation
is shown graphically in Fig.
8. The
curve is the assumed noise spectrum, and the three lines
correspond to different choices of P. If P is small, we
cannot make P(f) +N(f) constant, since this would re-
quire negative power at some frequencies. It is easily
shown, however, that in this case the best P(f) is ob-
tained by making P(f) +N(f) constant whenever possi-
ble, and making P(f) zero at other frequencies. With
low values of P, some of the frequencies will not be used
at all.
Fig. 8-Best distribution of transmitter power.
If we now vary the noise spectrum N(f), keeping the
total noise power constant and always adjusting the
signal spectrum P(f) to give the maximum transmission,
we can determine the worst spectrum for the noise. This
1949
,19
turns out to be the white-noise case. Although this only
shows it to be worst among the Gaussian noises, it will
be shown later to be the worst among all possible noises
with the given power N in the band.
X. THE CHANNEL CAPACITY WITH AN ARBI-
TRARY TYPE OF NOISE
Of course, there are many kinds of noise which are not
Gaussian; for example, impulse noise, or white noise
that has passed through a nonlinear device. If the signal
is perturbed by one of these types of noise, there will
still be a definite channel capacity C, the maximum rate
of transmission of binary digits. We will merely outline
the general theory here.'0
Let xi, X2,
, x, be the amplitudes of the noise at
successive sample points, and let
p(Xb X2,
-
,xn)dxl
..
dxn,
(35)
be the probability that these amplitudes lie between xi
and xi+dxl, X2 and x2+dx2, etc. Then the function p
describes the statistical structure of the noise, insofar
as n successive samples are concerned. The entropy, H, of
the noise is defined as follows. Let
1r
r
Hn =- .J
.
p(x'
X,,
n
loge p(x,,
x
*
*
)
*
*,
dXr.
(36)
Then
H = lim Hn.
(37)
This limit exists in all cases of practical interest, and can
be determined in many of them. H is a measure of the
randomness of the noise. In the case of white Gaussian
noise of power N, the entropy is
H = loge
V/2ireN.
(38)
It is convenient to measure the randomness of an arbi-
trary type of noise not directly by its entropy, but by
comparison with white Gaussian noise. We can calculate
the power in a white noise having the same entropy as
the given noise. This power, namely,
N =-exp 2H
(39)
2re
where H is the entropy of the given noise, will be called
the entropy power of the noise.
A noise of entropy power N acts very much like a
white noise of power N, insofar as perturbing the mes-
sage is concerned. It can be shown that the region of
uncertainty about each signal point will have the same
volume as the region associated with the white noise. Of
course, it will no longer be a spherical region. In proving
Theorem
1 this volume of uncertainty was the chief
10 C. E. Shannon, "A mathematical theory of communication,"
Bell Sys. Tech. Jour., vol. 27, pp. 379-424 and 623-657; July and
October, 1948.
property of the noise used. Essentially the same argu-
ment may be applied for any kind of noise with minor
modifications. The result is summarized in the follow-
ing:
THEOREM 3: Let a noise limited to the band W have
power N and entropy power N1. The capacity C is then
bounded by
W 02P + N,lVl
W19 P + N
Wlog2
-<C_NWlog
N,
(40)
where P is the average signal power and W the bandwidth.
If the noise is a white Gaussian noise, N, = N, and the
two limits are equal. The result then reduces to the
theorem in Section VII.
For any noise, N, <N. This is why white Gaussian
noise is the worst among all possible noises. If the noise
is Gaussian with spectrum N(f), then
rw
N, = W exp W j
log N(f)df.
The upper limit in Theorem 3 is then reached when we
are above the highest noise power in Fig. 8. This is easily
verified by substitution.
In the cases of most interest, P/N is fairly large. The
two limits are then nearly the same, and we can use
HW log (P+N)/N, as the capacity. The upper limit is the
best choice, since it can be shown that as P/N increases,
C approaches the upper limit.
XI. DISCRETE SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Up to now we have been chiefly concerned with the
channel. The capacity C measures the maximum rate at
which a random series of binary digits can be transmit-
ted when they are encoded in the best possible way. In
general, the information to be transmitted will not be
in this form. It may, for example, be a sequence of let-
ters as in telegraphy,
a speech wave, or a television
signal. Can we find an equivalent number of bits per
second for information sources of this type? Consider
first the discrete case; i.e., the message consists of a se-
quence of discrete symbols. In general, there may be
correlation of various sorts between the different sym-
bols. If the message is English text, the letter E is the
most frequent, T is often followed by H, etc. These cor-
relations allow
a certain compression of the text by
proper encoding. We may define the entropy of a dis-
crete source in a way analogous to that for a noise;
namely, let
Hn= -
p(i, j,
*
,s) 10g2 P(i, j,
*
,s)
(42)
n
i
where p(i, j,
*
* *, s) is the probability of the sequence
of symbols i, j,
*
* *, s, and the sum is over all sequences
of n symbols. Then the entropy is
H = lim Hn.
n-4 oo
(43)
(41)
J7anuary
Shannon: Communication in the Presence of Noise
It turns out that H is the number of bits produced by
the source for each symbol of message. In fact, the fol-
lowing result is proved in the Appendix.
THEOREM 4. It is possible to encode all sequences of n
message symbols into sequences of binary digits in such a
way that the average number of binary digits per message
symbol is approximately H, the approximation approach-
ing equality as n increases.
It follows that, if we have a channel of capacity C and
a discrete source of entropy H, it is possible to encode
the messages via binary digits into signals and transmit
at the rate C/H of the original message symbols per
second.
For example, if the source produces a sequence of let-
ters A, B, or C with probabilities PA=0.6, PB=0.3,
Pc =0.1, and successive letters are
chosen independ-
ently,
then Hn=H1=-[0.6
log2
0.6+0.3
10g2
0.3
+0.1 log2 0.1] = 1.294 and the information produced is
equivalent to 1.294 bits for each letter of the message.
A channel with a capacity of 100 bits per second could
transmit with best encoding 100/1.294=77.3 message
letters per second.
THEOREM 5: If the message source has power Q, en-
tropy power Q, and bandwidth W1, the rate R of generating
information in bits per second is bounded by
Q
~~~Q
W log2 Q-< R < Wl log2
-
(44)
N,
~~~N1
where N1 is the maximum tolerable mean square error
in reproduction. If we have a channel with capacity C
and a source whose rate of generating information R is
less than or equal to C, it is possible to encode the source
in such a way as to transmit over this channel with the
fidelity measured by N1. If R > C, this is impossible.
In the case where the message source is producing
white thermal noise, Q= Q. Hence the two bounds are
equal and R =-W log Q/N1. We can, therefore, transmit
white noise of power Q and band W1 over a channel of
band W perturbed by a white noise of power N and re-
cover the original message with mean square error N1
if, and only if,
Q
P+N
W log
-< W log
N
(45)
N1
N
XII. CONTINUOUS SOURCES
If the source is producing a continuous function of
time, then without further data we must ascribe it an
infinite rate of generating information. In fact, merely
to specify exactly one quantity which has a continuous
range of possibilities requires an infinite number of
binary digits. We cannot send continuous information
exactly over a channel of finite capacity.
Fortunately, we do not need
to send continuous
messages exactly. A certain amount of discrepancy be-
tween the original and the recovered messages can al-
ways be tolerated. If a certain tolerance is allowed, then
a definite finite rate in binary digits per second can be
assigned to a continuous source. It must be remembered
that this rate depends on the nature and magnitude of
the allowed error between original and final messages.
The rate may be described as the rate of generating in-
formation relative to the criterion offidelity.
Suppose the criterion of fidelity is the rms discrep-
ancy between the original and recovered signals, and
that we can tolerate a value VIN,. Then each point in
the message space is surrounded by a small sphere of
radius V211 W1N1. If the system is such that the re-
covered message lies within this sphere, the transmission
will be satisfactory. Hence, the number of different mes-
sages which' must be capable of distinct transmission is
of the order of the volume V1 of the region of possible
messages divided by the volume of the small spheres.
Carrying out this argument in detail along lines similar
to those used in Sections VII and IX leads to the fol-
lowing result:
APPENDIX
Consider the possible sequences of n symbols. Let
them be arranged in order of decreasing probability,
PI.- P2 >P3 ** * > P8. Let Pi =
i Ipj. The ith message
is encoded by expanding Pj as a binary fraction and us-
ing only the first ti places where ti is determined from
log2 -
< ti <
1 + 10g2 -.
Pi
pi
(46)
Probable sequences have short codes and improbable
ones long codes. We have
- < pi <
2'i=
-2ti-
(47)
The codes for different sequences will all be different.
Pi+1, for example, differs by pi from Pi, and therefore
its binary expansion will differ in one or more of the
first ti places, and similarly for all others. The average
length of the encoded message will be EPiti. Using
(46),
or
pi log pi
piti < E pi(l-log pi)
(48)
or
nHn< E piti < 1 + nHn.
(49)
The average number of binary digits used per message
symbol is 1/n IpPt4 and
Hn
<- Z pPti <- + Hn.
n
n
(50)
As n-- oo, H.--H and 1/n-0O, so the average number of
bits per message symbol approaches H.
1949
