The Lattice Theory ofInformation-
Claude E.Shannon
The word' "information' has been given many different meanings byvarious writers in the
general field ofinformation theory. It is likely that at least anumber ofthese will prove
sufficiently useful incertain applications todeserve further study andpermanent recognition. It
ishardly to be expected that a single concept ofinformation would satisfactorily account for the
numerous possible applications ofthisgeneral field. The present note outlines anew approach
toinformation theory which is aimed specifically at the analysis ofcertain communication
problems inwhich there exist anumber ofinformation sources simultaneously inoperation. A
typical example is that ofasimple communication channel with a feedback path from the
receiving point to the transmitting point. The problem is to make use ofthe feedback
information forimproving forward transmission, and to determine theforward channel capacity
when the best possible use is made ofthis feedback information. Another more general
problem is that ofacommunication system consisting ofalarge number oftransmitting and
receiving points with some type ofinterconnecting network between thevarious points. The
problem here is to formulate the best systems design whereby, insome sense, thebest overalJ
useoftheavailable facilities is made. While theanalysis sketched here has not yet proceeded
to the point ofacomplete solution ofthese problems, partial answers have been found and it is
believed that a complete solution may be possible.
1. The Nature ofInformation
Incommunication theory we consider information to be produced by a suitable stochastic
process. We consider here only the discrete case; thesuccessive symbols ofthemessage are
chosen from a finite "alphabet", and it is assumed formathematical simplicity that the
stochastic process producing themessage hasonly a finite number ofpossible internal states.
The message itself is then a discrete time series which isone sample from theensemble of
possible messages that might have been produced by the information source. The entropy H(x)
ofsuch a source is ameasure oftheamount ofinformation produced by the source perJetter of
message. However, H(x) can hardly be said to represent theactual information. Thus two
entirely different sources might produce information at the same rate (same H)butcertainly
they are not producing the same information.
Todefine aconcept of actual information, consider thefollowing situation. Suppose a
source isproducing, say, English text. This may be translated orencoded into many other
forms (e.g. Morse code) in such a way that it is possible todecode and recover theoriginal.
For most purposes ofcommunication, any ofthese forms isequally good and may be
considered tocontain the same information. Given any particular encoded form, any ofthe
others may be obtained (although ofcourse itmay require aninvolved computation to do so).
Thus we are led to define the actual information ofastochastic process as that which is
common to all stochastic processes which may be obtained from the original byreversible
encoding operations. It is desirable from a practical standpoint and mathematically convenient
tolimit thekind ofallowed encoding operations incertain ways. In particular, it is desirable to
require that the encoding bedone by a transducer with a finite number ofpossible internal
*IRE Transactions Information Theory, No.I,Feb. 1950.

The Lattice Theory ofInformation 181
states. This finite memory condition prevents paradoxical situations inwhich information goes
into a transducer more rapidly on the average than it comes out.
Each coded version oftheoriginal process may be called atranslation oftheoriginal
language. These translations may be viewed asdifferent ways ofdescribing the same
information, inabout thesame way that a vector may be described by its components invarious
coordinate systems. The information itself may be regarded as the equivalence class ofall
translations orways ofdescribing the same information.
2. The Metric, Topology and Convergent Sequences
With this definition ofinformation, it is possible to set up a metric satisfying the usual
requirements. The metric p(x,y)measures thedistance between two information elements x
andy,and is given interms ofconditional entropies. We define
p(x,y)=Hx(y) +Hy(x) =2H(x, y)-H(x) -H(y) .
The symmetry property p(x,y)=p(y, x)isobvious from the definition. Ifp(x,y)=0,
both Hx(y) andHy(x) must bezero (since both arenecessarily non-negative), and this requires
that the xsequence becalculable with probability Ifrom the ysequence and vice versa. The
triangle law for a metric,
p(x, y)+p(y, z)~p(x, z),
isreadily shown byexpanding these terms into the various entropies and making useofknown
inequalities forentropies. It may be noted that p (x,y)isindependent ofthe particular
translations ofxandyused in its calculation. This is due to the fact that Hx(y)andH;(x)are
invariant under finite state encoding operations applied toxandy.
The existence ofanatural metric enables us to define a topology for a set ofinformation
elements and in particular thenotion ofsequences ofsuch elements which approach alimit. A
setofinformation elements xJ 'X2 ' ... , Xn, ...will be said to be Cauchy convergent if
lim p(x nl'xll)=0 .
m---+ 00
11~00
The introduction ofthese sequences as new elements (analogous toirrational numbers)
completes thespace in a satisfactory way and enables one to simplify thestatement ofvarious
results.
3. The Information Lattice
Arelation ofinclusion, x~y,between two information elements xandycan be defined by
x~y==Hx(y) =0 .
This essentially requires that)' can be obtained by a suitable finite state operation (orlimit of
such operations) onx.Ifx~ywe call yanabstraction of.x.Ifx~y, y~z,then x~z. If
x~y,then H(x) ~H(y). Also x>ymeans x~y,xt:-y.The information element, oneof
whose translations is the process which always produces thesame symbol, is the 0 element, and
x~0 for any x.
The sum oftwo information elements, z=x+y,is the process oneofwhose translations
consists oftheordered pairs (xn»Y11)'where xnis the nthsymbol produced by the xsequence
and similarly forYn' Wehave z~x,z~yand there is no fJ.<z with these properties; z is the
least upper bound ofxandy.The element zrepresents the total information ofboth xandy.

x
yx+y
x
Fig. 1
z
Fig. 2x+z
y
o
xy+z
z
ozc.E.Shannon
The product z=xyisdefined as the largest zsuch that z~x,z~y;that is, there is no
Jl>Zwhich is an abstraction ofboth xandy.The product isunique. Here zis the common
information ofxandy.
With these definitions a set ofinformation elements with all their sums and products form a
metric lattice. The lattices obtained in this way are not, in general, distributive, nor even
modular. However they can be made to be relatively complemented by the addition ofsuitable
elements. Forx~yit is possible toconstruct anelement z with
z+x=y,
zx=0 .
The element zis not in genera) unique.
The lattices obtained from a finite set ofinformation sources areofarather general type;
they are at least asgeneral as the class offinite partition lattices. With any finite partition
lattice it is possible toconstruct aninformation lattice which isabstractly isomorphic to it by a
simple procedure.
Some examples ofsimple information lattices areshown inFigs. 1 and 2.

The Lattice Theory ofInformation 183
In Fig. 1 there are three independent sources. The product of any two of these elements is
zero, and the conventional lattice diagram is that shown at the right. In Fig. 2 there are two
independent sources of binary digits, xand y.The sequence zis the sum mod 2 of
corresponding symbols from xandy.In this case again the product of any two of x,yand z is
zero, but the sum of any two represents the total information in the system. In this case the
Jattice is non-distributive, since z y+zx=0+0=0, while z(x+y)=z#-O.
4. The Delay Free Group GI
The definition of equality for information based on the group G of all reversible encoding
operations allows x==ywhen yis for example a delayed version of x:Yn=xn+a•In some
situations, when one must act on information at a certain time, a delay is not permissible. In
such a case we may consider the more restricted group G Iofinstantaneously reversible
translations. One may define inclusion, sum, product, etc., in an analogous way, and this also
leads to a lattice but of much greater complexity and with many different invariants.

