RecentContributionsto
TheMathematicalTheoryofCommunication
Warren Weaver
September, 1949
ClaudeShannon WarrenWeaver
Abstract
This paper is written in three main sections. In the ﬁrst and t hird, W. W. is responsible both for the ideas and the
form. The middle section, namely “2) Communication Problem s at Level A” is an interpretation of mathematical
papers by Dr. Claude E. Shannon of the Bell Telephone Laborat ories. Dr. Shannon’s work roots back, as von Neu-
mann has pointed out, to Boltzmann’s observation, in some of his work on statistical physics (1894), that entropy
is related to “missing information,” inasmuch as it is relat ed to the number of alternatives which remain possible to
a physical system after all the macroscopically observable information concerning it has been recorded. L. Szilard
(Zsch.f. Phys. Vol. 53, 1925) extended this idea toa general discussion of i nformation inphysics, and von Neumann
(Math. Foundation of Quantum Mechanics , Berlin, 1932, Chap. V) treated information in quantum mech anics and
particle physics. Dr. Shannon’s work connects more directl y with certain ideas developed some twenty years ago
by H. Nyquist and R. V. L. Hartley, both of the Bell Laboratori es; and Dr. Shannon has himself emphasized that
communication theory owes a great debt to Professor Norbert Wiener for much of its basic philosophy. Professor
Wiener, on the other hand, points out that Shannon’s early wo rk on switching and mathematical logic antedated his
own interest in this ﬁeld; and generously adds that Shannon c ertainly deserves credit for independent development
of such fundamental aspects of the theory as the introductio n of entropic ideas. Shannon has naturally been spe-
ciallyconcernedtopushtheapplicationstoengineeringco mmunication,whileWienerhasbeenmoreconcernedwith
biological application (central nervous system phenomena , etc.).
WARRENWEAVER 1 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

1 Introductory Note on the General Setting of the Analytical Communica-
tion Studies
1.1 Communication
THE WORD communication will be used here in a
verybroadsensetoincludealloftheproceduresby
which one mind may affect another. This, of course, in-
volves not only written and oral speech, but also music,
thepictorialarts,thetheatre,theballet,andinfactallh u-
manbehavior. Insomeconnectionsitmaybedesirableto
use a still broader deﬁnition of communication, namely,
one which would include the procedures by means of
whichonemechanism(sayautomaticequipmenttotrack
anairplaneandtocomputeitsprobablefuturepositions)
affectsanothermechanism(sayaguidedmissilechasing
thisairplane).
Thelanguageof this memorandumwill oftenappear
torefertothe special,butstill verybroadandimportant,
ﬁeldofthecommunicationofspeech;butpracticallyev-
erything said applies equally well to music of any sort,
andtostill ormovingpictures,asintelevision.
1.2 Three Levelsof
Communications Problems
Relative to the broad subject of communication, there
seem to be problems at three levels. Thus it seems rea-
sonableto ask,serially:
LEVELA. How accurately can the symbols of communica-
tionbe transmitted? (The technical problem.)
LEVELB. How precisely do the transmitted symbols convey
the desiredmeaning? (Thesemantic problem.)
LEVELC. How effectively does the received meaning affect
conduct in the desired way? (The effectiveness prob-
lem.)
Thetechnical problems are concerned with the ac-
curacy of transference from sender to receiver of sets of
symbols (written speech), or of a continuously varying
signal (telephonic or radio transmission of voice or mu-
sic), or of a continuously varying two-dimensional pat-
tern (television), etc. Mathematically, the ﬁrst involves
transmission of a ﬁnite set of discrete symbols, the sec-
ondthetransmissionofonecontinuousfunctionoftime,
and the third the transmission of many continuousfunc-
tions of time or of one continuous function of time and
oftwospace coordinates.Thesemantic problems are concernedwith the iden-
tity,orsatisfactorilycloseapproximation,intheinterp re-
tation of meaning by the receiver, as compared with the
intendedmeaning of the sender. This is a very deep and
involved situation, even when one deals only with the
relatively simpler problems of communicating through
speech.
One essential complication is illustrated by the re-
mark that if Mr. X is suspected not to understand what
Mr. Y says, then it is theoretically not possible, by hav-
ing Mr. Y do nothing but talk further with Mr. X, com-
pletelytoclarifythissituationinanyﬁnitetime. IfMr.Y
says“Doyounowunderstandme?”andMr.Xsays“Cer-
tainly,Ido,”thisisnotnecessarilyacertiﬁcationthatun -
derstandinghasbeenachieved. Itmayjust bethat Mr.X
did not understand the question. If this sounds silly, try
it again as “Czy paﬁ mnie rozumie?” with the answer
“Haiwakkateimasu.”Ithinkthatthisbasicdifﬁculty1is,
at least in the restricted ﬁeld of speech communication,
reduced to a tolerable size (but never completely elimi-
nated)by“explanations”which(a)arepresumablynever
more than approximations to the ideas being explained,
but which (b) are understandable since they are phrased
in languagewhichhas previouslybeen madereasonably
clearbyoperationalmeans. Forexample,itdoesnottake
longtomakethesymbolfor“yes”inanylanguageoper-
ationallyunderstandable.
The semantic problem has wide ramiﬁcations if one
thinksofcommunicationingeneral. Consider,forexam-
ple,themeaningtoaRussian ofaU.S.newsreelpicture.
Theeffectiveness problems are concerned with the
successwithwhichthemeaningconveyedtothereceiver
leads to the desired conduct on his part. It may seem
at ﬁrst glance undesirably narrow to imply that the pur-
pose of all communicationis to inﬂuencethe conductof
the receiver. But with any reasonably broad deﬁnition
of conduct, it is clear that communication either affects
conductoriswithoutanydiscernibleandprobableeffect
atall.
The problem of effectiveness involves æsthetic con-
siderations in the case of the ﬁne arts. In the case of
speech, written or oral, it involves considerations which
range all the way from the mere mechanics of style,
through all the psychological and emotional aspects of
1“WhenPfungst(1911)demonstrated thatthehorsesofElberf eld,whowereshowingmarvelouslinguisticandmathematica l ability,weremerely
reacting to movementsofthetrainer’s head, Mr.Krall(1911 ),their owner, metthecriticism inthemostdirect manner. H easked thehorseswhether
they could see such small movements and in answer they spelle d out an emphatic ‘No.’ Unfortunately we cannot all be so sure that our questions
are understood or obtain such clear answers.” See Lashley, K . S., “Persistent Problems in the Evolution of Mind” in Quarterly Review of Biology ,
v.24, March, 1949, p. 28.
WARRENWEAVER 2 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

propaganda theory, to those value judgments which are
necessarytogiveusefulmeaningto thewords“success”
and “desired” in the opening sentence of this section on
effectiveness.
Theeffectivenessproblemiscloselyinterrelatedwith
the semantic problem, and overlaps it in a rather vague
way; and there is in fact overlap between all of the sug-
gestedcategoriesofproblems.
1.3 Comments
Sostated,onewouldbeinclinedtothinkthatLevelAisa
relativelysuperﬁcialone,involvingonlytheengineering
detailsofgooddesignofacommunicationsystem;while
BandCseemtocontainmostifnotallofthephilosoph-
ical contentofthegeneralproblemofcommunication.
The mathematical theory of the engineering aspects
ofcommunication,asdevelopedchieﬂybyClaudeShan-non at the Bell Telephone Laboratories, admittedly ap-
plies in the ﬁrst instance onlyto problemA, namely, the
technicalproblemofaccuracyoftransferenceof various
types of signals from sender to receiver. But the theory
has, I think, a deep signiﬁcance which proves that the
preceding paragraph is seriously inaccurate. Part of the
signiﬁcance of the new theory comes from the fact that
levelsBandC,above,canmakeuseonlyofthosesignal
accuracies which turn out to be possible when analyzed
at Level A. Thus any limitations discovered in the the-
ory at Level A necessarily apply to levels B and C. But
a larger part of the signiﬁcance comes from the fact that
the analysis at Level A discloses that this level overlaps
theotherlevelsmorethanonecouldpossiblynaivelysus-
pect. Thus the theory of Level A is, at least to a signiﬁ-
cant degree, also a theory of levels B and C. I hope that
thesucceedingpartsofthismemorandumwillilluminate
andjustifythese last remarks.
2 Communication Problemsat LevelA
2.1 A CommunicationSystem and
Its Problems
THEcommunicationsystemconsideredmaybesym-
bolicallyrepresentedasfollows:
Information
Source
Message Message
Noise
SourceTransmitter
Signal Received
SignalReceiver Destination
Theinformation source , selects a desired message
out of a set of possible messages (this is a particularly
important remark, which requires considerable explana-
tion later). The selected message may consist of written
orspokenwords,orofpictures,music,etc.
Thetransmitter changes this message into thesig-
nalwhichisactuallysent overthe communicationchan-
nelfrom the transmitter to the receiver. In the case of
telephony, the channel is a wire, the signal a varying
electrical current on this wire; the transmitter is the set
of devices (telephone transmitter, etc.) which change
the sound pressure of the voice into the varying electri-
cal current. In telegraphy, the transmitter codes written
words into sequences of interrupted currents of varying
lengths (dots, dashes, spaces). In oral speech, the infor-
mation source is the brain, the transmitter is the voice
mechanism producing the varying sound pressure (thesignal)whichistransmittedthroughtheair(thechannel).
Inradio,thechannelissimplyspace(ortheæther,ifany
one still prefers that antiquated and misleading word),
andthesignalistheelectromagneticwavewhichistrans-
mitted.
Thereceiverisasortofinversetransmitter,changing
the transmitted signal back into a message, and handing
this message on to the destination. When I talk to you,
mybrainistheinformationsource,yoursthedestination;
my vocal system is the transmitter, and your ear and the
associatedeighthnerveisthereceiver.
Intheprocessofbeingtransmitted,itisunfortunately
characteristic that certain things are added to the sig-
nal which were not intended by the information source.
These unwanted additions may be distortions of sound
(in telephony,for example)or static (in radio),or distor-
tions in shape or shading of picture (television), or er-
rorsintransmission(telegraphyorfacsimile),etc. All of
thesechangesin thetransmittedsignalarecalled noise.
The kind of questions which one seeks to ask con-
cerningsucha communicationsystem are:
a. How does one measure amount of information ?
b. How does one measure the capacityof a communication
channel?
c. The action of the transmitter in changing the message into
the signal often involves a coding process . What are the
characteristicsofanefﬁcientcodingprocess? Andwhen
thecodingisasefﬁcientaspossible,atwhatratecanthe
channel convey information?
d. What are the general characteristics of noise? How does
noiseaffecttheaccuracyofthemessage ﬁnallyreceived
WARRENWEAVER 3 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

at the destination? How can one minimize the unde-
sirable effects of noise, and to what extent can they be
eliminated?
e. If the signal being transmitted is continuous (as in oral
speech or music) rather than being formed of discrete
symbols (as in written speech, telegraphy, etc.), how
does this fact affect the problem?
We will now state, without any proofs and with a
minimumofmathematicalterminology,the main results
whichShannonhasobtained.
2.2 Information
The word information , in this theory, is used in a spe-
cial sense that must not be confused with its ordinary
usage. In particular, information must not be confused
withmeaning.
Infact,twomessages,oneofwhichisheavilyloaded
with meaning and the other of which is pure nonsense,
canbeexactlyequivalent,fromthepresentviewpoint,as
regardsinformation. Itisthis,undoubtedly,thatShannon
means when he says that “the semantic aspects of com-
municationareirrelevanttotheengineeringaspects.”But
this does not mean that the engineeringaspects are nec-
essarilyirrelevanttothe semanticaspects.
To be sure, this word information in communication
theoryrelatesnotsomuchtowhatyou dosay,astowhat
youcouldsay. Thatis,informationisameasureofone’s
freedom of choice when one selects a message. If one
is confrontedwith a very elementary situation where he
has to choose one of two alternative messages, then it is
arbitrarily said that the information,associated with thi s
situation, is unity. Note that it is misleading (although
often convenient) to say that one or the other message,
conveys unit information. The concept of information
appliesnotto the individualmessages(asthe conceptof
meaning would), but rather to the situation as a whole,
the unit information indicating that in this situation one
has an amount of freedomof choice, in selecting a mes-
sage, which it is convenient to regard as a standard or
unitamount.
The two messages between which one must choose,
insuchaselection,canbeanythingonelikes. Onemight
be the text of the King James Version of the Bible, and
the other might be “Yes.” The transmitter might code
these two messages so that “zero” is the signal for the
ﬁrst, and “one” the signal for the second; or so that a
closed circuit (current ﬂowing) is the signal for the ﬁrst,
and an open circuit (no current ﬂowing) the signal for
the second. Thus the two positions, closed and open, of
a simplerelay,mightcorrespondtothe twomessages.To be somewhat more deﬁnite, the amount of infor-
mation is deﬁned, in the simplest cases, to be measured
by the logarithm of the number of available choices. It
beingconvenientto use logarithms2to the base 2, rather
than common or Briggs’ logarithm to the base 10, the
information,whenthere areonlytwo choices,is propor-
tional to the logarithm of 2 to the base 2. But this is
unity; so that a two-choice situation is characterized by
information of unity, as has already been stated above.
This unit of informationis called a “bit,” this word, ﬁrst
suggested by John W. Tukey, being a condensation of
“binary digit.” When numbers are expressed in the bi-
nary system there are only two digits, namely 0 and 1;
just as ten digits, 0 to 9 inclusive, are used in the deci-
mal number system which employs 10 as a base. Zero
andone maybe taken symbolicallyto representanytwo
choices,asnotedabove;so that “binarydigit”or“bit” is
natural to associate with the two-choice situation which
hasunitinformation.
If one has available say 16 alternative messages
among which he is equally free to choose, then since
16=24so thatlog216=4, one says that this situation
ischaracterizedby4bitsofinformation.
Itdoubtlessseemsqueer,whenoneﬁrstmeetsit,that
informationis deﬁnedasthe logarithm of the numberof
choices. But in the unfolding of the theory, it becomes
moreandmoreobviousthat logarithmicmeasuresarein
fact the natural ones. At the moment, only one indica-
tion of this will be given. It was mentioned above that
onesimpleon-or-offrelay,withitstwopositionslabeled,
say, 0 and 1 respectively, can handle a unit information
situation,in whichthere are buttwo messagechoices. If
onerelaycan handleunit information,howmuchcan be
handled by say three relays? It seems very reasonable
to want to say that three relays could handle three times
as much informationas one. And this indeed is the way
it works out if one uses the logarithmic deﬁnition of in-
formation. For three relays are capable of respondingto
23or 8 choices, which symbolically might be written as
000, 001, 011, 010, 100, 110, 101, 111, in the ﬁrst of
which all three relays are open, and in the last of which
all threerelaysare closed. Andthe logarithmtothebase
2of23is3,sothatthelogarithmicmeasureassignsthree
units of information to this situation, just as one would
wish. Similarly, doubling the available time squares the
numberofpossiblemessages,anddoublesthelogarithm;
and hence doublesthe informationif it is measured log-
arithmically.
Theremarksthusfarrelatetoartiﬁciallysimplesitua-
tionswheretheinformationsourceisfreetochooseonly
between several deﬁnite messages—like a man pick-
2Whenmx=y, thenxis said to bethe logarithm of yto the base m.
WARRENWEAVER 4 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

ing out one of a set of standard birthday greeting tele-
grams. A more natural and more important situation is
that in which the information source makes a sequence
of choicesfromsome set of elementarysymbols,the se-
lected sequence then forming the message. Thus a man
may pick out one word after another, these individually
selectedwordsthenaddingupto formthemessage.
At this point an important consideration which has
beeninthebackground,sofar,comestothefrontforma-
jor attention. Namely, the role which probability plays
in the generation of the message. For as the successive
symbols are chosen, these choices are, at least from the
point of view of the communication system, governed
by probabilities; and in fact by probabilities which are
not independent, but which, at any stage of the process,
dependupontheprecedingchoices. Thus,ifwearecon-
cerned with English speech, and if the last symbol cho-
senis“the,”thentheprobabilitythatthenextwordbean
article, or a verb form other than a verbal, is very small.
Thisprobabilisticinﬂuencestretchesovermorethantwo
words, in fact. After the three words “in the event” the
probabilityfor“that” asthe nextwordis fairlyhigh,and
for“elephant”asthenextwordis verylow.
That there are probabilitieswhich exert a certain de-
gree of control over the English language also becomes
obvious if one thinks, for example, of the fact that in
our language the dictionary contains no words whatso-
ever in which the initial letter jis followed by b,c,d,
f,g,j,k,l,q,r,t,v,w,x, orz; so that the probabil-
ity is actually zero that an initial jbe followed by any
of these letters. Similarly, anyone would agree that the
probabilityislowforsuchasequenceofwordsas“Con-
stantinopleﬁshingnastypink.”Incidentally,itislow,bu t
not zero; for it is perfectly possible to think of a pas-
sage in which one sentence closes with “Constantinople
ﬁshing,” and the next beginswith “Nasty pink.” And we
might observein passing that the unlikely four-wordse-
quence under discussion hasoccurred in a single good
Englishsentence,namelytheoneabove.
A system which produces a sequence of symbols
(which may, of course, be letters or musical notes, say,
rather than words) according to certain probabilities is
called astochastic process , and the special case of a
stochastic process in which the probabilities depend on
the previous events, is called a Markoff process or a
Markoff chain. Of the Markoff processes which might
conceivably generate messages, there is a special class
which is of primary importance for communication the-
ory, these being what are called ergodic processes . The
analyticaldetailsherearecomplicatedandthereasoning
sodeepandinvolvedthatithastakensomeofthebestef-
forts of the best mathematicians to create the associatedtheory;buttheroughnatureofanergodicprocessiseasy
to understand. It is one which produces a sequence of
symbols which would be a poll-taker’s dream, because
any reasonably large sample tends to be representative
of the sequence as a whole. Suppose that two persons
choosesamplesin differentways, andstudy what trends
theirstatisticalpropertieswouldshowasthesamplesbe-
come larger. If the situation is ergodic, then those two
persons, however they may have chosen their samples,
agree in their estimates of the properties of the whole.
Ergodic systems, in other words, exhibit a particularly
safeandcomfortingsort ofstatistical regularity.
Now let us return to the idea of information . When
wehaveaninformationsourcewhichisproducingames-
sage by successively selecting discrete symbols (letters,
words, musical notes, spots of a certain size, etc.), the
probabilityofchoiceofthevarioussymbolsat onestage
of the process being dependent on the previous choices
(i.e., a Markoffprocess), what about the informationas-
sociatedwiththisprocedure?
The quantity which uniquely meets the natural re-
quirements that one sets up for “information” turns out
to be exactly that which is knownin thermodynamicsas
entropy. It is expressedin terms of the variousprobabil-
ities involved—those of getting to certain stages in the
process of forming messages, and the probabilities that,
when in those stages, certain symbols be chosen next.
Theformula,moreover,involvesthe logarithm ofproba-
bilities, so that it is a natural generalization of the loga-
rithmicmeasurespokenofaboveinconnectionwithsim-
plecases.
Tothosewhohavestudiedthephysicalsciences,itis
most signiﬁcant that an entropy-like expression appears
inthetheoryasa measureofinformation. Introducedby
Clausius nearly one hundred years ago, closely associ-
atedwith thenameofBoltzmann,andgivendeepmean-
ing by Gibbs in his classic work on statistical mechan-
ics,entropyhasbecomesobasicandpervasiveaconcept
that Eddington1remarks “The law that entropy always
increases—thesecondlaw ofthermodynamics—holds,I
think,thesupremepositionamongthelawsofNature.”
In the physical sciences, the entropy associated with
a situation is a measure of the degree of randomness, or
of “shufﬂedness” if you will, in the situation; and the
tendencyofphysicalsystemstobecomelessandlessor-
ganized,to becomemore and moreperfectlyshufﬂed, is
so basic that Eddington argues that it is primarily this
tendency which gives time its arrow—which would re-
veal to us, for example, whether a movieof the physical
worldisbeingrunforwardorbackward.
Thuswhenonemeetstheconceptofentropyincom-
munication theory, he has a right to be rather excited—
WARRENWEAVER 5 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

a right to suspect that one has hold of something that
may turn out to be basic and important. That informa-
tion be measured by entropy is, after all, natural when
we remember that information, in communication the-
ory, is associated with the amount of freedom of choice
we have in constructing messages. Thus for a commu-
nication source one can say, just as he would also say it
of a thermodynamic ensemble, “This situation is highly
organized,itisnotcharacterizedbyalargedegreeofran-
domnessorofchoice—thatistosay,theinformation(or
theentropy)islow.”Wewillreturntothispointlater,for
unless I am quite mistaken, it is an important aspect of
themoregeneralsigniﬁcanceofthistheory.
Havingcalculatedtheentropy(ortheinformation,or
the freedom of choice) of a certain information source,
onecancomparethistothemaximumvaluethisentropy
could have, subject only to the condition that the source
continue to employ the same symbols. The ratio of the
actual to the maximum entropy is called the relative en-
tropyof the source. If the relative entropy of a certain
source is, say .8, this roughly means that this source is,
in itschoiceofsymbolstoforma message,about80per
centasfreeasit couldpossiblybewiththese samesym-
bols. One minusthe relative entropyis called the redun-
dancy. Thisisthefractionofthestructureofthemessage
whichisdeterminednotbythefreechoiceofthesender,
but rather by the accepted statistical rules governingthe
use of the symbols in question. It is sensibly called re-
dundancy, for this fraction of the message is in fact re-
dundantin somethingclose to the ordinarysense; that is
to say, this fraction of the message is unnecessary (and
hencerepetitiveorredundant)in the sense that if it were
missing themessage wouldstill beessentially complete,
orat least couldbecompleted.
It is most interesting to note that the redundancy of
English is just about 50 per cent,3so that about half of
thelettersorwordswe chooseinwritingorspeakingare
under our free choice, and about half (although we are
not ordinarily aware of it) are really controlled by the
statisticalstructureofthelanguage. Apartfrommorese-
rious implications, which again we will postpone to our
ﬁnal discussion, it is interesting to note that a language
musthaveatleast50percentofrealfreedom(orrelative
entropy)inthechoiceoflettersifoneistobeabletocon-
struct satisfactory crossword puzzles. If it has complete
freedom, then every array of letters is a crossword puz-
zle. Ifithasonly20percentoffreedom,thenitwouldbe
impossible to construct crossword puzzles in such com-
plexity and number as would make the game popular.Shannon has estimated that if the English language had
onlyabout30percentredundancy,thenitwouldbepos-
sibleto constructthree-dimensionalcrosswordpuzzles.
Before closing this section on information, it should
be noted that the real reason that Level A analysis deals
with a concept of information which characterizes the
whole statistical nature of the informationsource, and is
not concerned with the individual messages (and not at
alldirectlyconcernedwiththemeaningoftheindividual
messages) is that from the point of view of engineering,
a communication system must face the problem of han-
dling any message that the source can produce. If it is
not possible or practicableto design a system which can
handle everything perfectly, then the system should be
designed to handle well the jobs it is most likely to be
asked to do, and should resign itself to be less efﬁcient
fortherare task. Thissort ofconsiderationleadsat once
to the necessity of characterizingthe statistical natureo f
the whole ensemble of messages which a given kind of
source can and will produce. And information , as used
incommunicationtheory,doesjustthis.
Although it is not at all the purpose of this paper to
be concerned with mathematical details, it nevertheless
seemsessentialtohaveasgoodanunderstandingaspos-
sible of the entropy-like expression which measures in-
formation. If one is concerned,as in a simple case, with
asetofnindependentsymbols,orasetof nindependent
complete messages for that matter, whose probabilities
of choice are p1,p2...pn, then the actual expression for
theinformationis
H=−[p1log p1+p2log p2+...+pnlog pn]
or
H=−∑pilog pi
where4the symbol ∑, indicates, as is usual in mathe-
matics, that one is to sum all terms like the typical one,
pilog piwrittenasa deﬁningsample.
Thislooksalittlecomplicated;butletusseehowthis
expressionbehavesinsomesimplecases.
Supposeﬁrst that we are choosingonlybetweentwo
possible messages, whose probabilities are then p1for
theﬁrstand p2=1−p1fortheother. Ifonereckons,for
thiscase,thenumericalvalueof H,itturnsoutthat Hhas
itslargestvalue,namelyone,whenthetwomessagesare
equally probable; that is to say when p1=p2=1
2that
istosay,whenoneiscompletelyfreetochoosebetween
the two messages. Just assoon asone message becomes
more probable than the other ( p1greater than p2, say),
thevalueof Hdecreases. Andwhenonemessageisvery
3The50 per cent estimate accounts only for statistical struc ture out to about eight letters, so that the ultimate value is presumably a little higher.
4Do not worry about the minus sign. Any probability is a number less than or equal to one, and the logarithms of numbers less t han one are
themselves negative. Thusthe minus sign isnecessary in ord er thatHbein fact positive.
WARRENWEAVER 6 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

probable ( p1almost one and p2almost zero, say), the
valueofHisverysmall (almostzero).
In the limiting case where one probability is unity
(certainty)andalltheotherszero(impossibility),then H
iszero(nouncertaintyatall—nofreedomofchoice—no
information).
ThusHis largest when the two probabilities are
equal (i.e., when one is completely free and unbiased in
the choice), and reduces to zero when one’s freedom of
choiceis gone.
Thesituationjustdescribedisinfacttypical. Ifthere
aremany,ratherthantwo,choices,then Hislargestwhen
the probabilities of the various choices are as nearly
equal as circumstances permit—when one has as much
freedom as possible in making a choice, being as little
as possible driven toward some certain choices which
have more than their share of probability. Suppose, on
theotherhand,thatonechoicehasaprobabilitynearone
so that all the otherchoiceshave probabilitiesnear zero.
This is clearly a situation in which one is heavily inﬂu-
enced toward one particular choice, and hence has little
freedom of choice. And Hin such a case does calculate
tohaveaverysmallvalue—theinformation(thefreedom
ofchoice,theuncertainty)islow.
Whenthenumberofcasesisﬁxed,wehavejustseen
that then the information is the greater, the more nearly
equal are the probabilitiesof the various cases. There is
another important way of increasing H, namely by in-
creasing the number of cases. More accurately, if all
choices are equally likely, the more choices there are,
the larger Hwill be; There is more “information”if you
select freely out of a set of ﬁfty standardmessages, than
ifyouselect freelyoutofaset oftwenty-ﬁve.
2.3 Capacity ofa Communication
Channel
After the discussion of the preceding section, one is not
surprisedthatthecapacityofachannelistobedescribed
notintermsofthenumberof symbolsitcantransmit,but
rather in termsof the informationit transmits. Or better,
since this last phrase lends itself particularly well to a
misinterpretation of the word information, the capacity
of a channel is to be described in terms of its ability to
transmitwhat isproducedoutof sourceof a giveninfor-
mation.
If the source is of a simple sort in which all symbols
are of the same time duration (which is the case, for ex-
ample,withteletype),ifthesourceissuchthateachsym-
bol chosen represents sbits of information(being freelychosen from among 2ssymbols), and if the channel can
transmit, say nsymbolsper second, then the capacity of
Cofthe channelisdeﬁnedtobe nsbitspersecond.
Inamoregeneralcase,onehastotakeaccountofthe
varyinglengthsofthevarioussymbols. Thusthegeneral
expression for capacity of a channel involves the loga-
rithmofthenumbersofsymbolsofcertaintimeduration
(whichintroduces,ofcourse,theideaof information and
correspondsto the factor sin the simple case of the pre-
cedingparagraph);andalsoinvolvesthe numberofsuch
symbols handled (which corresponds to the factor nof
the preceding paragraph). Thus in the general case, ca-
pacity measures not the number of symbols transmitted
per second, but rather the amount of information trans-
mittedpersecond,usingbitspersecondasitsunit.
2.4 Coding
At the outset it was pointed out that the transmitter ac-
cepts the messageand turns it into something called the
signal, the latter being what actually passes over the
channeltothe receiver.
The transmitter, in such a case as telephony, merely
changestheaudiblevoicesignaloverintosomething(the
varying electrical current on the telephone wire) which
isatonceclearlydifferentbutclearlyequivalent. Butthe
transmitter may carry out a much more complex opera-
tion on the message to produce the signal. It could, for
example, take a written message and use some code to
encipher this message into, say a sequence of numbers;
these numbers then being sent over the channel as the
signal.
Thus one says, in general, that the function of the
transmitter is to encode, and that of the receiver to de-
code, the message. The theoryprovidesfor verysophis-
ticatedtransmittersandreceivers—such,forexample,as
possess “memories,” so that the way they encode a cer-
tain symbol of the message depends not only upon this
onesymbol,but also uponprevioussymbolsof the mes-
sageandthewaytheyhavebeenencoded.
We are now in a position to state the fundamental
theorem,producedin thistheory,fora noiselesschannel
transmitting discrete symbols. This theorem relates to a
communication channel which has a capacity of Cbits
per second, accepting signals from a source of entropy
(orinformation)of Hbitspersecond. Thetheoremstates
that by devising proper coding proceduresfor the trans-
mitteritispossibletotransmitsymbolsoverthechannel
at an average rate5which is nearly C/H, but which, no
matter how clever the coding, can never be made to ex-
5Weremember that thecapacity Cinvolves theidea ofinformation transmitted per second, an d isthus measured in bits persecond. Theentropy
Hhere measures information per symbol, so that the ratio of CtoHmeasures symbols per second.
WARRENWEAVER 7 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

ceedC/H.
The signiﬁcance of this theorem is to be discussed
more usefully a little later, when we have the more gen-
eralcasewhennoiseispresent. Forthemoment,though,
it is important to notice the critical role which coding
plays.
Remember that the entropy (or information) asso-
ciated with the process which generates messages or
signals is determined by the statistical character of the
process—bythevariousprobabilitiesforarrivingatmes-
sagesituationsandforchoosing,wheninthosesituations
the next symbols. The statistical nature of messages is
entirely determined by the character of the source. But
thestatisticalcharacterofthe signalasactuallytransmit-
ted by a channel, and hence the entropy in the channel,
is determinedbothby whatone attemptsto feedinto the
channel and by the capabilities of the channel to handle
different signal situations. For example, in telegraphy,
there have to be spaces between dots and dots, between
dots and dashes, and between dashes and dashes, or the
dotsanddasheswouldnotberecognizable.
Now it turns out that when a channel does have cer-
tain constraints of this sort, which limit complete signal
freedom, there are certain statistical signal characteris -
ticswhichleadto asignalentropywhichislargerthanit
would be forany otherstatistical signal structure,and in
thisimportantcase,thesignalentropyisexactlyequalto
thechannelcapacity.
Intermsoftheseideas,itisnowpossiblepreciselyto
characterize the most efﬁcient kind of coding, The best
transmitter, in fact, is that which codes the message in
such a way that the signal has just those optimumstatis-
tical characteristics which are best suited to the channel
to be used—which in fact maximize the signal (or one
may say, the channel) entropy and make it equal to the
capacityCofthechannel.
This kind of coding leads, by the fundamental theo-
rem above, to the maximum rate C/Hfor the transmis-
sion of symbols. But for this gain in transmission rate,
onepaysa price. Forratherperverselyit happensthatas
one makes the coding more and more nearly ideal, one
is forced to longer and longer delays in the process of
coding. Part of this dilemma is met by the fact that in
electronic equipment “long” may mean an exceedingly
small fraction of a second, and part by the fact that one
makesa compromise,balancingthegainin transmission
rateagainstlossofcodingtime.
2.5 Noise
How does noise affect information? Information is, we
must steadily remember, a measure of one’s freedom ofchoice in selecting a message. The greater this free-
dom of choice, and hence the greater the information,
the greater is the uncertainty that the message actually
selectedis some particularone. Thusgreaterfreedomof
choice, greater uncertainty, greater information go hand
inhand.
Ifnoiseisintroduced,thenthereceivedmessagecon-
tains certain distortions, certain errors, certain extran e-
ousmaterial,thatwouldcertainlyleadonetosaythatthe
received message exhibits, because of the effects of the
noise, an increased uncertainty. But if the uncertainty is
increased, the information is increased, and this sounds
asthoughthenoisewerebeneﬁcial!
It is generally true that when there is noise, the re-
ceivedsignalexhibitsgreaterinformation—orbetter,the
received signal is selected out of a more varied set than
is the transmitted signal. This is a situation which beau-
tifully illustrates the semantic trap into which one can
fall if he does not remember that “information” is used
here with a special meaning that measures freedom of
choiceandhenceuncertaintyasto what choicehasbeen
made. Itisthereforepossibleforthewordinformationto
haveeithergoodorbadconnotations. Uncertaintywhich
arises by virtue of freedom of choice on the part of the
senderis desirableuncertainty. Uncertaintywhicharises
because of errors or because of the inﬂuence of noise is
undesirableuncertainty.
It is thus clear where the joker is in saying that the
received signal has more information. Some of this in-
formationisspuriousandundesirableandhasbeenintro-
ducedvia the noise. To get the useful informationin the
received signal we must subtract out this spurious por-
tion.
Before we can clear up this point we have to stop
for a little detour. Suppose one has two sets of symbols,
such as the message symbols generated by the informa-
tion source, and the signal symbols which are actually
received. The probabilities of these two sets of symbols
are interrelated, for clearly the probability of receiving
a certain symbol depends upon what symbol was sent.
With no errors from noise or from other causes, the re-
ceived signals would correspond precisely to the mes-
sage symbolssent; and in the presenceof possible error,
the probabilities for received symbols would obviously
be loaded heavily on those which correspond,or closely
correspond,tothe messagesymbolssent.
Now in such a situation one can calculate what is
called the entropy of one set of symbols relative to the
other. Let us, for example, consider the entropy of the
message relative to the signal. It is unfortunate that we
cannot understand the issues involved here without go-
ing into some detail. Suppose for the moment that one
WARRENWEAVER 8 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

knows that a certain signal symbol has actually been
received. Then each message symbol takes on a cer-
tain probability—relatively large for the symbol identi-
cal with or the symbols similar to the one received, and
relativelysmall forall others. Using thisset of probabil-
ities, onecalculatesa tentativeentropyvalue. Thisisthe
message entropy on the assumption of a deﬁnite known
received or signal symbol. Under any good conditions
its value is low, since the probabilities involved are not
spreadaroundratherevenlyonthe variouscases, butare
heavily loaded on one or a few cases. Its value would
be zero (see page 6) in any case where noise was com-
pletely absent, for then, the signal symbol being known,
all message probabilities would be zero except for one
symbol (namely the one received), which would have a
probabilityofunity.
Foreachassumptionastothesignalsymbolreceived,
one can calculate one of these tentative message en-
tropies. Calculate all of them, and then average them,
weightingeachoneinaccordancewiththeprobabilityof
the signal symbol assumed in calculating it. Entropies
calculated in this way, when there are two sets of sym-
bols to consider, are called relative entropies . The par-
ticular one just described is the entropy of the message
relative to the signal, and Shannon has named this also
theequivocation .
Fromthewaythisequivocationiscalculated,wecan
see what its signiﬁcance is. It measures the average un-
certainty in the message when the signal is known . If
there were no noise, then there would be no uncertainty
concerningthe message if the signal is known. If the in-
formation source has any residual uncertainty after the
signal is known, then this must be undesirable uncer-
taintyduetonoise.
The discussion of the last few paragraphs centers
aroundthe quantity“the averageuncertaintyin the mes-
sage source when the received signal is known.” It can
equally well be phrased in terms of the similar quantity
“the average uncertainty concerning the received signal
whenthemessagesentisknown.”Thislatteruncertainty
would,ofcourse,also bezeroiftherewerenonoise.
As to the interrelationship of these quantities, it is
easyto provethat
H(x)−Hy(x) =H(y)−Hx(y)
whereH(x)is the entropy or information of the source
ofmessages; H(y)theentropyorinformationofreceived
signals;Hy(x)the equivocation,or the uncertaintyin the
message source if the signal be known; Hx(y)the un-
certainty in the received signals if the messages sent be
known, or the spurious part of the received signal in-
formation which is due to noise. The right side of thisequation is the useful information which is transmitted
inspite ofthebadeffectofthenoise.
It is now possible to explain what one means by the
capacityCof anoisychannel. Itis, infact, deﬁnedto be
equal to the maximum rate (in bits per second) at which
usefulinformation( i.e.,totaluncertaintyminusnoiseun-
certainty)canbetransmittedoverthechannel.
Why does one speak, here, of a “maximum” rate?
What can one do, that is, to make this rate larger or
smaller? The answer is that one can affect this rate by
choosing a source whose statistical characteristics are
suitably related to the restraints imposed by the nature
of the channel. That is, one can maximize the rate of
transmitting useful information by using proper coding
(seepages7to 8).
Andnow,ﬁnally,letusconsiderthefundamentalthe-
orem for a noisy channel. Suppose that this noisy chan-
nelhas,inthesensejustdescribed,acapacity C,suppose
it is accepting from an informationsource characterized
by an entropy of H(x)bits per second, the entropy of
the received signals being H(y)bits per second. If the
channel capacity Cis equal to or larger than H(x), then
bydevisingappropriatecodingsystems,theoutputofthe
source can be transmitted over the channel with as little
error as one pleases. However small a frequency of er-
roryouspecify,thereisacodewhichmeetsthedemand.
But if the channel capacity Cis less than H(x), the en-
tropyofthesourcefromwhichitacceptsmessages,then
it is impossible to devise codes which reduce the error
frequencyaslowasonemayplease.
Howevercleveroneiswiththecodingprocess,itwill
always be true that after the signal is received there re-
mains some undesirable (noise) uncertainty about what
the message was; and this undesirable uncertainty—this
equivocation—will always be equal to or greater than
H(x)−C. Furthermore,thereisalwaysat least onecode
whichiscapableofreducingthisundesirableuncertainty,
concerningthe message, downto a value whichexceeds
H(x)−Cbyanarbitrarilysmall amount.
Themostimportantaspect,ofcourse,isthatthemin-
imumundesirableorspuriousuncertaintiescannotbere-
ducedfurther,nomatterhowcomplicatedorappropriate
the coding process. This powerful theorem gives a pre-
cise and almost startlingly simple description of the ut-
most dependability one can ever obtain from a commu-
nicationchannelwhichoperatesinthepresenceofnoise.
One practicalconsequence,pointedout by Shannon,
should be noted. Since English is about 50 per cent re-
dundant, it would be possible to save about one-half the
time of ordinary telegraphy by a proper encoding pro-
cess, provided one were going to transmit over a noise-
less channel. When there is noise on a channel, how-
WARRENWEAVER 9 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

ever, there is some real advantage in not using a coding
process that eliminates all of the redundancy. For the
remaining redundancy helps combat the noise. This is
very easy to see, for just because of the fact that the re-
dundancyof English is high, one has, for example, little
or no hesitation about correcting errors in spelling that
havearisenduringtransmission.
2.6 Continuous Messages
Up to this point we have been concernedwith messages
formed out of discrete symbols, as words are formed of
letters, sentences of words, a melodyof notes, or a half-
tone picture of a ﬁnite number of discrete spots. What
happens to the theory if one considers continuous mes-
sages, such as the speaking voice with its continuous
variationofpitchandenergy?
Very roughly one may say that the extended theory
is somewhat more difﬁcult and complicated mathemat-
ically, but not essentially different. Many of the above
statements for the discrete case require no modiﬁcation,
andothersrequireonlyminorchange.
Onecircumstancewhichhelpsagooddealisthefol-
lowing. Asapracticalmatter,oneisalwaysinterestedin
acontinuoussignalwhichisbuiltupofsimpleharmonic
constituents of not all frequencies ,but ratheroffrequen-
cieswhichliewhollywithina bandfromzerofrequency
to, say, a frequency of Wcycles per second. Thus al-
thoughthehumanvoicedoescontainhigherfrequencies,
very satisfactory communicationcan be achieved over a
telephone channel that handles frequencies only up to,
say four thousand. With frequenciesup to ten or twelve
thousand, high ﬁdelity radio transmission of symphonic
musicispossible,etc.
There is a very convenient mathematical theorem
which states that a continuous signal, Tseconds in du-
rationandband-limitedinfrequencyto therangefrom0
toW, can becompletely speciﬁed by stating 2 TWnum-
bers. This is really a remarkable theorem. Ordinarily
acontinuouscurvecanbeonlyapproximatelycharacter-
izedbystatinganyﬁnitenumberofpointsthroughwhich
it passes, and an inﬁnite numberwould in general be re-
quired for complete information about the curve. But if
the curveis built up out ofsimple harmonicconstituentsof a limited number of frequencies, as a complex sound
is built up out of a limited number of pure tones, then a
ﬁnite number of parametersis all that is necessary. This
has the powerful advantage of reducing the character of
thecommunicationproblemforcontinuoussignalsfrom
a complicated situation where one would have to deal
with an inﬁnite number of variables to a considerably
simpler situation where one deals with a ﬁnite (though
large)numberofvariables.
In thetheoryforthecontinuouscase thereare devel-
oped formulas which describe the maximum capacity C
of a channel of frequency bandwidth W, when the aver-
age power used in transmitting is P, the channel being
subject to a noise of power N, this noise being “white
thermalnoise” of a special kind whichShannondeﬁnes.
This white thermal noise is itself band limited in fre-
quency,andtheamplitudesofthevariousfrequencycon-
stituents are subject to a normal (Gaussian) probability
distribution. Under these circumstances, Shannon ob-
tains the theorem, again really quite remarkable in its
simplicity and its scope, that it is possible, by the best
coding,to transmitbinarydigitsatthe rateof
W log2P+N
N
bits per second and have an arbitrarily low frequencyof
error. But thisratecannotpossiblybe exceeded,nomat-
terhowcleverthecoding,withoutgivingrisetoadeﬁnite
frequencyoferrors. Forthecaseofarbitrarynoise,rather
than the special “white thermal” noise assumed above,
Shannon does not succeed in deriving one explicit for-
mula for channel capacity, but does obtain useful upper
and lower limits for channel capacity. And he also de-
rives limits for channel capacity when one speciﬁes not
the average power of the transmitter, but rather the peak
instantaneouspower.
Finally it should be stated that Shannon obtains re-
sults which are necessarily somewhat less speciﬁc, but
which are of obviously deep and sweeping signiﬁcance,
which,forageneralsortofcontinuousmessageorsignal,
characterizethe ﬁdelityofthe receivedmessage,andthe
conceptsofrateatwhichasourcegeneratesinformation,
rate of transmission, and channel capacity, all of these
beingrelativeto certainﬁdelityrequirements.
WARRENWEAVER 10 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

3 The Interrelationshipof the Three Levels ofCommunicatio nProblems
3.1 Introductory
IN THEFIRST SECTIONof this paper it was sug-
gested that there are three levels at which one may
consider the general communication problem. Namely,
onemayask:
LEVELA. How accurately can the symbols of communica-
tionbe transmitted?
LEVELB. How precisely do the transmitted symbols convey
the desiredmeaning?
LEVELC. How effectively does the received meaning affect
conduct inthe desiredway?
It was suggested that the mathematical theory of
communication, as developed by Shannon, Wiener, and
others, and particularly the more deﬁnitely engineering
theory treated by Shannon, although ostensibly applica-
bleonlytoLevelAproblems,actuallyishelpfulandsug-
gestiveforthelevelBandCproblems.
Wethentookalook,insection2,atwhatthismathe-
maticaltheoryis,whatconceptsitdevelops,whatresults
it has obtained. It is the purpose of this concluding sec-
tion to review the situation, and see to what extent and
in what terms the original section was justiﬁed in indi-
cating that the progress made at Level A is capable of
contributingtolevelsBandC,wasjustiﬁedinindicating
thattheinterrelationofthethreelevelsissoconsiderabl e
thatone’sﬁnalconclusionmaybethattheseparationinto
thethreelevelsisreallyartiﬁcialandundesirable.
3.2 Generality oftheTheory at
Level A
Theobviousﬁrstremark,andindeedtheremarkthatcar-
riesthe major burdenof the argument,is that the mathe-
maticaltheoryisexceedinglygeneralinitsscope,funda-
mentalintheproblemsit treats,andofclassic simplicity
andpowerintheresultsit reaches.
This is a theory so general that one does not need
to say what kinds of symbols are being considered—
whether written letters or words, or musical notes, or
spokenwords,orsymphonicmusic,orpictures. Thethe-
oryis deepenoughso that the relationshipsit revealsin-
discriminately apply to all these and to other forms of
communication. Thismeans,ofcourse,thatthetheoryis
sufﬁciently imaginatively motivated so that it is dealing
withtherealinnercoreofthecommunicationproblem—
with those basic relationships which hold in general, no
matterwhatspecialformthe actualcasemaytake.It is an evidence of this generality that the theory
contributes importantly to, and in fact is really the ba-
sic theory of cryptography which is, of course, a form
of coding. In a similar way, the theory contributes to
theproblemoftranslationfromonelanguageto another,
althoughthecompletestoryhereclearlyrequiresconsid-
erationof meaning,as well as of information. Similarly,
the ideasdevelopedin this work connectso closely with
theproblemofthelogicaldesignofgreatcomputersthat
it is no surprise that Shannon has just written a paper
on the design of a computer which would be capable of
playing a skillful game of chess. And it is of further di-
rect pertinence to the present contention that this paper
closeswiththeremarkthateitheronemustsay thatsuch
a computer “thinks,” or one must substantially modify
theconventionalimplicationoftheverb“tothink.”
As a second point, it seems clear that an important
contribution has been made to any possible general the-
oryofcommunicationbytheformalizationonwhichthe
present theory is based. It seems at ﬁrst obvious to dia-
gram a communicationsystem as it is done at the outset
of this theory; but this breakdown of the situation must
beverydeeplysensibleandappropriate,asonebecomes
convincedwhenheseeshowsmoothlyandgenerallythis
viewpoint leads to central issues. It is almost certainly
true that a consideration of communication on levels B
andCwillrequireadditionstotheschematicdiagramon
page 3, but it seems equally likely that what is required
areminoradditions,andnoreal revision.
ThuswhenonemovestolevelsBandC,itmayprove
to be essential to take account of the statistical charac-
teristics of the destination. One can imagine, as an ad-
dition to the diagram, another box labeled “Semantic
Receiver” interposed between the engineering receiver
(which changes signals to messages) and the destina-
tion. This semantic receiver subjects the message to a
second decoding, the demand on this one being that it
must match the statistical semantic characteristicsof the
message to the statistical semantic capacities of the to-
tality of receivers, or of that subset of receivers which
constitutethe audienceonewishestoaffect.
Similarlyonecanimagineanotherboxinthediagram
which, inserted between the information source and the
transmitter, would be labeled “semantic noise,” the box
previously labeled as simply “noise” now being labeled
“engineeringnoise.”Fromthissourceisimposedintothe
signal the perturbationsor distortionsof meaning which
arenotintendedbythe sourcebut whichinescapablyaf-
fect the destination. And the problem of semantic de-
coding must take this semantic noise into account. It is
WARRENWEAVER 11 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

also possible to think of an adjustment of original mes-
sage so that the sum of message meaning plus semantic
noiseisequaltothedesiredtotalmessagemeaningatthe
destination.
Thirdly, it seems highly suggestive for the problem
atalllevelsthaterrorandconfusionariseandﬁdelityde-
creases, when, no matter how goodthe coding,one tries
to crowd too much over a channel ( i.e.,H>C). Here
again a general theory at all levels will surely have to
take into account not only the capacity of the channel
but also (even the words are right!) the capacity of the
audience. If one tries to overcrowd the capacity of the
audience, it is probablytrue, by direct analogy, that you
do not, so to speak, ﬁll the audience up and then waste
only the remainder by spilling. More likely, and again
by direct analogy, if you overcrowd the capacity of the
audience you force a general and inescapable error and
confusion.
Fourthly, it is hard to believe that levels B and C do
not have much to learn from, and do not have the ap-
proachto their problemsusefully oriented by, the devel-
opment in this theory of the entropic ideas in relation to
theconceptofinformation.
The concept of information developed in this theory
at ﬁrst seems disappointing and bizarre—disappointing
because it has nothing to do with meaning, and bizarre
because it deals not with a single message but rather
withthestatisticalcharacterofawholeensembleofmes-
sages, bizarre also because in these statistical terms the
two words information anduncertainty ﬁnd themselves
tobepartners.
Ithink,however,thattheseshouldbeonlytemporary
reactions; and that one should say, at the end that this
analysis has so penetratingly cleared the air that one is
now,perhapsfor the ﬁrst time, readyfor a real theoryof
meaning. An engineering communication theory is just
like a very proper and discreet girl accepting your tele-
gram. She pays no attention to the meaning, whether it
be sad,or joyous,or embarrassing. But she must be pre-
pared to deal with all that come to her desk. This idea
thatacommunicationsystemoughttotrytodealwithall
possible messages, and that the intelligent way to try is
to base design on the statistical character of the source,
is surely not without signiﬁcance for communication in
general. Languagemustbedesigned(ordeveloped)withaviewtothetotalityofthingsthatmanmaywishtosay;
butnotbeingabletoaccomplisheverything,ittooshould
doaswellaspossibleasoftenaspossible. Thatistosay,
it tooshoulddealwithitstask statistically.
Theconceptofthe informationto beassociatedwith
asourceleadsdirectly,aswehaveseen,toastudyofthe
statistical structure of language; and this study reveals
about the English language, as an example, information
whichseemssurelysigniﬁcanttostudentsofeveryphase
of language and communication. The idea of utilizing
the powerful body of theory concerning Markoff pro-
cesses seems particularly promising for semantic stud-
ies, since this theory is speciﬁcally adapted to handle
oneof the most signiﬁcantbut difﬁcultaspects of mean-
ing, namely the inﬂuence of context. One has the vague
feeling that information and meaning may prove to be
something like a pair of canonically conjugate variables
in quantum theory, they being subject to some joint re-
striction that condemns a person to the sacriﬁce of the
oneasheinsists onhavingmuchoftheother.
Or perhaps meaning may be shown to be analogous
to one of the quantities on which the entropy of a ther-
modynamic ensemble depends. The appearance of en-
tropy in the theory, as was remarked earlier, is surely
most interesting and signiﬁcant. Eddington has already
been quoted in this connection, but there is another pas-
sagein“TheNatureofthePhysicalWorld”whichseems
particularlyaptandsuggestive:
Suppose that we were asked to arrange the following
in two categories— distance, mass, electric force, entropy,
beauty, melody.
I think there are the strongest grounds for placing en-
tropy alongside beauty and melody, and not with the ﬁrst
three. Entropy is only found when the parts are viewed
in association, and it is by viewing or hearing the parts
in association that beauty and melody are discerned. All
three are features of arrangement. It is a pregnant thought
that one of these three associates should be able to ﬁgure
as a commonplace quantity of science. The reason why
this stranger can pass itself off among the aborigines of
thephysical worldisthatitisabletospeaktheirlanguage,
viz.,the language of arithmetic.
IfeelsurethatEddingtonwouldhavebeenwillingto
includethewordmeaningalongwithbeautyandmelody;
and I suspect he would have been thrilled to see, in this
theory,thatentropynotonlyspeaksthelanguageofarith-
metic;it alsospeaksthelanguageoflanguage.
WARRENWEAVER 12 TheMathematicalTheoryof Communication

