

On  Computable  Numbers, 
with  an  Application  to  the 
Entscheidungsproblem  (1936) 

Alan  Turing 


The  “computable”  numbers  may  be  described  briefly  as  the  real  numbers 
whose  expressions  as  a  decimal  are  calculable  by  finite  means.  Although  the 
subject  of  this  paper  is  ostensibly  the  computable  numbers,  it  is  almost  equally 
easy  to  define  and  investigate  computable  functions  of  an  integral  variable  or  a 
real  or  computable  variable,  computable  predicates,  and  so  forth.  The  funda¬ 
mental  problems  involved  are,  however,  the  same  in  each  case,  and  I  have  chosen 
the  computable  numbers  for  explicit  treatment  as  involving  the  least  cumbrous 
technique.  I  hope  shortly  to  give  an  account  of  the  relations  of  the  computable 
numbers,  functions,  and  so  forth  to  one  another.  This  will  include  a  development 
of  the  theory  of  functions  of  a  real  variable  expressed  in  terms  of  computable 
numbers.  According  to  my  definition,  a  number  is  computable  if  its  decimal  can 
be  written  down  by  a  machine. 

In  §§  9, 101  give  some  arguments  with  the  intention  of  showing  that  the  comp¬ 
utable  numbers  include  all  numbers  which  could  naturally  be  regarded  as 
computable.  In  particular,  I  show  that  certain  large  classes  of  numbers  are 
computable.  They  include,  for  instance,  the  real  parts  of  all  algebraic  numbers, 
the  real  parts  of  the  zeros  of  the  Bessel  functions,  the  numbers  n,  e,  etc.  The 
computable  numbers  do  not,  however,  include  all  definable  numbers,  and  an 
example  is  given  of  a  definable  number  which  is  not  computable. 

Although  the  class  of  computable  numbers  is  so  great,  and  in  many  ways 
similar  to  the  class  of  real  numbers,  it  is  nevertheless  enumerable.  In  §  8  I 
examine  certain  arguments  which  would  seem  to  prove  the  contrary.  By  the 
correct  application  of  one  of  these  arguments,  conclusions  are  reached  which  are 

[Received  28  May,  1936. — Read  12  November,  1936.] 

This  article  first  appeared  in  Proceedings  of  the  London  Mathematical  Society,  Series  2,  42  (1936-7).  It  is 
reprinted  with  the  permission  of  the  London  Mathematical  Society  and  the  Estate  of  Alan  Turing. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  59 


superficially  similar  to  those  of  Godel.1  These  results  have  valuable  applications. 
In  particular,  it  is  shown  (§11)  that  the  Hilbertian  Entscheidungsproblem  can 
have  no  solution. 

In  a  recent  paper  Alonzo  Church  has  introduced  an  idea  of  “effective  calcul- 
ability”,  which  is  equivalent  to  my  “computability”,  but  is  very  differently 
defined.2  Church  also  reaches  similar  conclusions  about  the  Entscheidungspro¬ 
blem.3  The  proof  of  equivalence  between  “computability”  and  “effective 
calculability”  is  outlined  in  an  appendix  to  the  present  paper. 


1.  Computing  machines 

We  have  said  that  the  computable  numbers  are  those  whose  decimals  are 
calculable  by  finite  means.  This  requires  rather  more  explicit  definition.  No 
real  attempt  will  be  made  to  justify  the  definitions  given  until  we  reach  §  9.  For 
the  present  I  shall  only  say  that  the  justification  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  human 
memory  is  necessarily  limited. 

We  may  compare  a  man  in  the  process  of  computing  a  real  number  to  a  machine 
which  is  only  capable  of  a  finite  number  of  conditions  q\ ,  qi,  . . . ,  qu  which  will  be 
called  “m-configurations”.  The  machine  is  supplied  with  a  “tape”  (the  analogue  of 
paper)  running  through  it,  and  divided  into  sections  (called  “squares”)  each 
capable  of  bearing  a  “symbol”.  At  any  moment  there  is  just  one  square,  say  the 
r-th,  bearing  the  symbol  @(r)  which  is  “in  the  machine”.  We  may  call  this  square 
the  “scanned  square”.  The  symbol  on  the  scanned  square  may  be  called  the 
“scanned  symbol”.  The  “scanned  symbol”  is  the  only  one  of  which  the  machine 
is,  so  to  speak,  “directly  aware”.  However,  by  altering  its  m-configuration  the 
machine  can  effectively  remember  some  of  the  symbols  which  it  has  “seen” 
(scanned)  previously.  The  possible  behaviour  of  the  machine  at  any  moment  is 
determined  by  the  m-configuration  q„  and  the  scanned  symbol  @(r).  This  pair 
qn,  @(r)  will  be  called  the  “configuration”:  thus  the  configuration  determines  the 
possible  behaviour  of  the  machine.  In  some  of  the  configurations  in  which  the 
scanned  square  is  blank  (i.e.  bears  no  symbol)  the  machine  writes  down  a  new 
symbol  on  the  scanned  square:  in  other  configurations  it  erases  the  scanned 
symbol.  The  machine  may  also  change  the  square  which  is  being  scanned,  but 
only  by  shifting  it  one  place  to  right  or  left.  In  addition  to  any  of  these  operations 
the  m-configuration  may  be  changed.  Some  of  the  symbols  written  down  will  form 
the  sequence  of  figures  which  is  the  decimal  of  the  real  number  which  is  being 


1  Godel,  “Uber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia  Mathematica  und  verwandter  Systeme,  I”, 
Monatshefte  Math.  Phys.,  38  (1931),  173-198. 

2  Alonzo  Church,  “An  unsolvable  problem  of  elementary  number  theory”,  American  J.  of  Math.,  58 
(1936),  345-363. 

3  Alonzo  Church,  “A  note  on  the  Entscheidungsproblem”,  /.  of  Symbolic  Logic,  1  (1936),  40-41. 


60  I  Alan  Turing 


computed.  The  others  are  just  rough  notes  to  “assist  the  memory”.  It  will  only  be 
these  rough  notes  which  will  be  liable  to  erasure. 

It  is  my  contention  that  these  operations  include  all  those  which  are  used  in 
the  computation  of  a  number.  The  defence  of  this  contention  will  be  easier  when 
the  theory  of  the  machines  is  familiar  to  the  reader.  In  the  next  section  I  therefore 
proceed  with  the  development  of  the  theory  and  assume  that  it  is  understood 
what  is  meant  by  “machine”,  “tape”,  “scanned”,  etc. 


2.  Definitions 

Automatic  machines 

If  at  each  stage  the  motion  of  a  machine  (in  the  sense  of  §1)  is  completely 
determined  by  the  configuration,  we  shall  call  the  machine  an  “automatic 
machine”  (or  u-machine). 

For  some  purposes  we  might  use  machines  (choice  machines  or  c-machines) 
whose  motion  is  only  partially  determined  by  the  configuration  (hence  the  use  of 
the  word  “possible”  in  §  1).  When  such  a  machine  reaches  one  of  these  ambigu¬ 
ous  configurations,  it  cannot  go  on  until  some  arbitrary  choice  has  been  made  by 
an  external  operator.  This  would  be  the  case  if  we  were  using  machines  to  deal 
with  axiomatic  systems.  In  this  paper  I  deal  only  with  automatic  machines,  and 
will  therefore  often  omit  the  prefix  a-. 

Computing  machines 

If  an  a-machine  prints  two  kinds  of  symbols,  of  which  the  first  kind  (called 
figures)  consists  entirely  of  0  and  1  (the  others  being  called  symbols  of  the  second 
kind),  then  the  machine  will  be  called  a  computing  machine.  If  the  machine  is 
supplied  with  a  blank  tape  and  set  in  motion,  starting  from  the  correct  initial 
m-configuration,  the  subsequence  of  the  symbols  printed  by  it  which  are  of  the 
first  kind  will  be  called  the  sequence  computed  by  the  machine.  The  real  number 
whose  expression  as  a  binary  decimal  is  obtained  by  prefacing  this  sequence  by  a 
decimal  point  is  called  the  number  computed  by  the  machine. 

At  any  stage  of  the  motion  of  the  machine,  the  number  of  the  scanned  square, 
the  complete  sequence  of  all  symbols  on  the  tape,  and  the  m-configuration  will 
be  said  to  describe  the  complete  configuration  at  that  stage.  The  changes  of  the 
machine  and  tape  between  successive  complete  configurations  will  be  called  the 
moves  of  the  machine. 

Circular  and  circle-free  machines 

If  a  computing  machine  never  writes  down  more  than  a  finite  number  of 
symbols  of  the  first  kind,  it  will  be  called  circular.  Otherwise  it  is  said  to  be 
circle-free. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  61 


A  machine  will  be  circular  if  it  reaches  a  configuration  from  which  there  is  no 
possible  move,  or  if  it  goes  on  moving,  and  possibly  printing  symbols  of  the 
second  kind,  but  cannot  print  any  more  symbols  of  the  first  kind.  The  sig¬ 
nificance  of  the  term  “circular”  will  be  explained  in  §  8. 

Computable  sequences  and  numbers 

A  sequence  is  said  to  be  computable  if  it  can  be  computed  by  a  circle-free 
machine.  A  number  is  computable  if  it  differs  by  an  integer  from  the  number 
computed  by  a  circle-free  machine. 

We  shall  avoid  confusion  by  speaking  more  often  of  computable  sequences 
than  of  computable  numbers. 


3.  Examples  of  computing  machines 


I.  A  machine  can  be  constructed  to  compute  the  sequence  010101...  .  The 
machine  is  to  have  the  four  m-configurations  “6”,  “c”,  “f”,  “e”  and  is  capable  of 
printing  “0”  and  “1”.  The  behaviour  of  the  machine  is  described  in  the  following 
table  in  which  “ R’ ’  means  “the  machine  moves  so  that  it  scans  the  square 
immediately  on  the  right  of  the  one  it  was  scanning  previously”.  Similarly  for 
“L”.  “£”  means  “the  scanned  symbol  is  erased”  and  “P”  stands  for  “prints”.  This 
table  (and  all  succeeding  tables  of  the  same  kind)  is  to  be  understood  to  mean 
that  for  a  configuration  described  in  the  first  two  columns  the  operations  in  the 
third  column  are  carried  out  successively,  and  the  machine  then  goes  over  into 
the  m- configuration  described  in  the  last  column.  When  the  second  column  is  left 
blank,  it  is  understood  that  the  behaviour  of  the  third  and  fourth  columns 
applies  for  any  symbol  and  for  no  symbol.  The  machine  starts  in  the 
m-configuration  b  with  a  blank  tape. 


Configuration 


Behaviour 


m-config. 

symbol 

operations 

final  m-config. 

b 

None 

P0,  R 

C 

c 

None 

R 

e 

e 

None 

PI,  R 

f 

f 

None 

R 

b 

If  (contrary  to  the  description  in  §  1)  we  allow  the  letters  L,  R  to  appear  more 

than  once  in  the  operations  column 

we  can  simplify  the  table  considerably. 

m-config. 

symbol 

operations 

final  m-config. 

f  None 

P0 

b 

b 

\  0 

R,  R,  PI 

b 

ll 

R,  R ,  P0 

b 

62  I  Alan  Turing 


II.  As  a  slightly  more  difficult  example  we  can  construct  a  machine  to 
compute  the  sequence  001011011101111011111...  .  The  machine  is  to  be 
capable  of  five  m-configurations,  viz.  “o”,  “q”,  “p”,  “f”,  “b”  and  of  printing 
“a”,  “x”,  “0”,  “1”.  The  first  three  symbols  on  the  tape  will  be  “aaO”;  the  other 
figures  follow  on  alternate  squares.  On  the  intermediate  squares  we  never  print 
anything  but  “x”.  These  letters  serve  to  “keep  the  place”  for  us  and  are  erased 
when  we  have  finished  with  them.  We  also  arrange  that  in  the  sequence  of  figures 
on  alternate  squares  there  shall  be  no  blanks. 

Configuration  Behaviour 


m-config. 

symbol 

operations 

final 

b 

Po,  R,  P9,  P,  P0,  R,  R,  P0,  I, 

L  0 

°  \ 

r  i 

R,  Px,  L,  L,  L 


l  0 

q 

q  \ 

f  Any  (0  or  1) 

R,R 

q 

[  None 

Pl,L 

p 

fx 

E,R 

q 

P 

R 

f 

l  None 

L,L 

p 

<  1 

f  Any 

R,R 

f 

l  None 

P0,  L,  L 

O 

To  illustrate  the  working  of  this  machine  a  table  is  given  below  of  the  first  few 
complete  configurations.  These  complete  configurations  are  described  by  writing 
down  the  sequence  of  symbols  which  are  on  the  tape,  with  the  m-configuration 
written  below  the  scanned  symbol.  The  successive  complete  configurations  are 
separated  by  colons. 



9  0 


:  9  9  0 

0  : 

:  9 

90  0:990 


:  9  9  0  0  1 

b 

c 

q 

q 

P 






:  9  9  0 



:990  0  1 : 

9  9  0 

0  1  : 

p 

P 

f 

f 





1  : 

:  a  9  0 



:  o  a  0  0 

1  0 

f 

f 






1  x  0  :  ... 

o 

This  table  could  also  be  written  in  the  form 

b  :  3  3  0  0  0  : 3  3  q  0  0  :...,  (C) 

in  which  a  space  has  been  made  on  the  left  of  the  scanned  symbol  and  the 
m-configuration  written  in  this  space.  This  form  is  less  easy  to  follow,  but  we  shall 
make  use  of  it  later  for  theoretical  purposes. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  63 


The  convention  of  writing  the  figures  only  on  alternate  squares  is  very  useful:  I 
shall  always  make  use  of  it.  I  shall  call  the  one  sequence  of  alternate  squares 
T-squares  and  the  other  sequence  T-squares.  The  symbols  on  T-squares  will  be 
liable  to  erasure.  The  symbols  on  T-squares  form  a  continuous  sequence.  There 
are  no  blanks  until  the  end  is  reached.  There  is  no  need  to  have  more  than  one 
T-square  between  each  pair  of  T-squares:  an  apparent  need  of  more  T-squares 
can  be  satisfied  by  having  a  sufficiently  rich  variety  of  symbols  capable  of  being 
printed  on  T-squares.  If  a  symbol  p  is  on  an  T-square  S  and  a  symbol  a  is  on  the 
T-square  next  on  the  right  of  S,  then  S  and  (3  will  be  said  to  be  marked  with  a. 
The  process  of  printing  this  a  will  be  called  marking  [3  (or  S)  with  a. 


4.  Abbreviated  tables 


There  are  certain  types  of  process  used  by  nearly  all  machines,  and  these,  in  some 
machines,  are  used  in  many  connections.  These  processes  include  copying  down 
sequences  of  symbols,  comparing  sequences,  erasing  all  symbols  of  a  given  form, 
etc.  Where  such  processes  are  concerned  we  can  abbreviate  the  tables  for  the 
m-configurations  considerably  by  the  use  of  “skeleton  tables”.  In  skeleton  tables 
there  appear  capital  German  letters  and  small  Greek  letters.  These  are  of  the  nature 
of  “variables”.  By  replacing  each  capital  German  letter  throughout  by  an 
m-configuration  and  each  small  Greek  letter  by  a  symbol,  we  obtain  the  table  for 
an  m-  configuration. 

The  skeleton  tables  are  to  be  regarded  as  nothing  but  abbreviations:  they  are 
not  essential.  So  long  as  the  reader  understands  how  to  obtain  the  complete 
tables  from  the  skeleton  tables,  there  is  no  need  to  give  any  exact  definitions  in 
this  connection. 

Let  us  consider  an  example: 


m-config. 

Symbol 

Behaviour 

Final  m-config. 

f(©,  S3,  a) 

(3 

L 

fi(®,  S3,  a) 

[  not  3 

L 

f(E,  S3,  a) 

fa 

© 

fi(G,  S3,  a) 

<  not  a 

R 

fi(®,  S3,  a) 

l  None 

R 

f2(®>  S3,  a) 

fa 

© 

f2(®>  S3,  a) 

<  not  a 

R 

fi(©,  S3,  a) 

l  None 

R 

S3 

From  the  m-configuration 
f(©,  S3,  a)  the  machine  finds 
the  symbol  of  form  a  which 
is  farthest  to  the  left  (the 
“first  a”)  and  the 
m-configuration  then 
becomes  ©.  If  there  is  no  a 
then  the  m-configuration 
becomes  S3. 


If  we  were  to  replace  ©  throughout  by  q  (say),  S3  by  r,  and  a  by  x,  we  should 
have  a  complete  table  for  the  m-configuration  f(q,r,  x).  f  is  called  an 
“m-configuration  function”  or  “m-function”. 


64  I  Alan  Turing 

The  only  expressions  which  are  admissible  for  substitution  in  an  zzz-function 
are  the  zzz-configurations  and  symbols  of  the  machine.  These  have  to  be  enumer¬ 
ated  more  or  less  explicitly:  they  may  include  expressions  such  as  p(e,  x);  indeed 
they  must  if  there  are  any  zzz-functions  used  at  all.  If  we  did  not  insist  on  this 
explicit  enumeration,  but  simply  stated  that  the  machine  had  certain 
zzz-configurations  (enumerated)  and  all  zzz-configurations  obtainable  by  substi¬ 
tution  of  zzz-configurations  in  certain  zzz-functions,  we  should  usually  get  an 
infinity  of  zzz-configurations;  e.g.,  we  might  say  that  the  machine  was  to  have 
the  zzz-configuration  C[  and  all  zzz-configurations  obtainable  by  substituting 
an  zzz-configuration  for  (£  in  p((£).  Then  it  would  have  Cf,  p(q),  p(p(q)), 
p(p(p(p))),  ...  as  zzz-configurations. 

Our  interpretation  rule  then  is  this.  We  are  given  the  names  of  the 
zzz-configurations  of  the  machine,  mostly  expressed  in  terms  of  zzz-functions. 
We  are  also  given  skeleton  tables.  All  we  want  is  the  complete  table  for  the 
zzz-configurations  of  the  machine.  This  is  obtained  by  repeated  substitution  in 
the  skeleton  tables. 

Further  examples 

(In  the  explanations  the  symbol  ►”  is  used  to  signify  “the  machine  goes  into 
the  zzz-configuration _ ”) 

e(C£,  23,  a)  f(ei(E,S3,  ol),  23,  a)  From  c(E,  ©,  a)  the  first  a  is  erased 

Ci((£,  23,  a)  E  ©  and  ->  E.  If  there  is  no  a  — >  83. 

e(23,  a)  e(e(23,  a),  23,  oz)  From  e(23,  a)  all  letters  a  are  erased 

and  ->  83. 

The  last  example  seems  somewhat  more  difficult  to  interpret  than  most.  Let  us 
suppose  that  in  the  list  of  zzz-configurations  of  some  machine  there  appears 
e(b,  x)  (  =  Cf,  say).  The  table  is 

e(b,  X) 

or  q 

Or,  in  greater  detail: 

q  e(q,  b,  x) 

e(q,  b,  x)  f (ex  (q,  b,  x),  b,  x) 

ei(q,  b,  x)  E  q. 

In  this  we  could  replace  ei(q,  h,  x)  by  q'  and  then  give  the  table  for  f  (with  the 
right  substitutions)  and  eventually  reach  a  table  in  which  no  zzz-functions 
appeared. 


e(e(f>,  x),  b,  x) 
e(q,  b,  x). 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  65 


pe(®,  p) 

f(pei(g,  p),  g,  n) 

From  pe(g,  P)  the  machine 

pCi(g,  P) 
g 

prints  P  at  the  end  of  the 
sequence  of  symbols  and  — ►  g. 

«g) 

L 

g 

From  f(g,  93,  a)  it  does  the 

r(E) 

R 

g 

same  as  for  f(g,  93,  a)  but 

f'(g,  93,  a) 

f(I(g),  93,  a) 

moves  to  the  left  before  — ►  g. 

f"  (g,  93,  a) 

f(r(g),  93,  a) 

C(®,  93,  a) 

f(Cl(g),  93,  a) 

C(g,  93,  a).  The  machine 

Ci(S)  p 

pe(g,  P) 

writes  at  the  end  the  first 
symbol  marked  a  and  — >  g. 

The  last  line  stands  for  the  totality  of  lines  obtainable  from  it  by  replacing  (3  by 

any  symbol  which  may 

occur  on  the  tape  of  the  machine  concerned. 

ce(g,  93,  a) 

c(e(g,  93,  a),  93,  a) 

ce(93,  a).  The  machine 

ce(93,  a) 

ce(ce(93,  a),  93,  a) 

copies  down  in  order 
at  the  end  all  symbols 
marked  a  and  erases 
the  letters  a;  —>  93. 

re(®,  93,  a,  p) 

flredg,  93,  a,  p),  93,  a) 

re(g,  93,  a,  P).  The  machine 

red®,  93,  a,  p) 

£,TP 

g 

replaces  the  first  a  by  p  and 
— >  g  — !•  93  if  there  is  no  a. 

re(93,  a,  P) 

te(re(93,  a,  (3),  93,  a,  p) 

te(93,  a,  P).  The  machine 
replaces  all  letters  a  by 

P;  -►  93. 

cr(g,  93,  a) 

c(re(g,  93,  a,  a),  93,  a) 

cr(93,  a)  differs  from 

cr(93,  a) 

cr(cr(93,  a),  re(93,  a,  a),  a 

)  ce  (93,  a)  only  in  that  the 

letters  a  are  not  erased.  The 
m-configuration  cr(93,  a)  is 
taken  up  when  no  letters  “a” 
are  on  the  tape. 

cp(g,  2t,  @,  a. 

P) 

f(cp,(®,  St,  P), 

f (St,  g,  P),  a) 

cpi(®,  St,  P) 

7  f'(cp2(g,  St,  y), 

SI,  P) 

cp2(g,  St,  y) 

{ 

y  g 

not  y  §{. 

66  I  Alan  Turing 


The  first  symbol  marked  a  and  the  first  marked  (3  are  compared.  If  there  is 
neither  a  nor  |3,  — >  (£.  If  there  are  both  and  the  symbols  are  alike,  — >  6. 
Otherwise  — >  21. 

cpe(g,  21,  g,  a,  p)  cp(e(e(S,  g,  p),  g,  a),  21,  g,  a,  p) 

Cpe(6,  St,  @,  a,  P)  differs  from  cp(S,  St,  @,  a,  P)  in  that  in  the  case  when 
there  is  similarity  the  first  a  and  P  are  erased. 

cpe(2l,  g,  a,  p)  cpe(cpe(2f,  g,  a,  p),  St,  g,  a,  p). 


cpe(?l,  (£,  a,  P).  The  sequence  of  symbols  marked  a  is  compared  with  the 
sequence  marked  p.  — •>  (£  if  they  are  similar.  Otherwise  — >  21.  Some  of  the 
symbols  a  and  p  are  erased. 


q(©) 

f  Any 
l  None 

R 

R 

q(S) 

qi(g) 

q(g,  a).  The  machine  finds 
the  last  symbol  of  form 

Qi(g) 

f  Any 

R 

q(g) 

a.  ->  g. 

l  None 

© 

q(g,  a) 

q(qi(g,  a)) 

Q i(®,  a) 

ra 

\  Not  a 

L 

g 

q i  (g,  a) 

pe2(g,  a,  p) 

pe(pe(g,  p),  a) 

pe2(g,  a,  P).  The  machine 
prints  a  p  at  the  end. 

ce2(93,  a,  P) 

ce(ce(93,  p),  a) 

ce3(23,  a,  p,  y).  The 

ce3(sT3,  a,  p,  y) 

ce(ce2(S3,  p,  y). 

machine  copies  down  at  the 

a) 

end  first  the  symbols  marked 
a,  then  those  marked  p,  and 
finally  those  marked  y;  it 
erases  the  symbols  a,  p,  y. 

e(g) 

r 

R 

ei(g) 

From  e(g)  the  marks  are 

l  Not  3 

L 

e(g) 

erased  from  all  marked 

ei(g) 

f  Any 
l  None 

R,E,R 

ei(g) 

g 

symbols.  — >  ©. 

5.  Enumeration  of  computable  sequences 

A  computable  sequence  y  is  determined  by  a  description  of  a  machine  which 
computes  y.  Thus  the  sequence  001011011101111 ...  is  determined  by  the  table 
on  p.  [62],  and,  in  fact,  any  computable  sequence  is  capable  of  being  described  in 
terms  of  such  a  table. 

It  will  be  useful  to  put  these  tables  into  a  kind  of  standard  form.  In  the  first 
place  let  us  suppose  that  the  table  is  given  in  the  same  form  as  the  first  table,  for 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  67 


example,  I  on  p.  [61].  That  is  to  say,  that  the  entry  in  the  operations  column  is 
always  of  one  of  the  forms  E:  E,  R:  E,  L:  Pa  :  Pa,  R  :  Pa,  L  :  R  :  L  :  or  no  entry 
at  all.  The  table  can  always  be  put  into  this  form  by  introducing  more  m- 
configurations.  Now  let  us  give  numbers  to  the  m-configurations,  calling  them 
qi,  ... ,  qu,  as  in  §  1.  The  initial  m-configuration  is  always  to  be  called  .  We 
also  give  numbers  to  the  symbols  Si,  ...,Sm  and,  in  particular,  blank  =  So, 
0  =  Si,  1  =  S2.  The  lines  of  the  table  are  now  of  form 


m-config. 

Symbol 

Operations 

Final  m-config. 

qi 

Sj 

PSk,L 

Qm 

m 

q: 

Sj 

PSk,R 

Qm 

(N2) 

q: 

Sj 

PSk 

C{m 

(N3) 

Lines  such  as 

qi 

Sj 

E,R 

Qm 

are  to  be  written  as 

qi 

Sj 

PS0,R 

and  lines  such  as 

qi 

Sj 

R 

C[m 

to  be  written  as 


qi  Sj  PSj,  R  q,n 

In  this  way  we  reduce  each  line  of  the  table  to  a  line  of  one  of  the  forms  (Ni), 
(N2),  (N3). 

From  each  line  of  form  (Nk)  let  us  form  an  expression  q,SjSkLqm;  from  each 
line  of  form  (N2)  we  form  an  expression  qiSjSkRqm\  and  from  each  line  of  form 
(N3)  we  form  an  expression  qjSjSkNqm. 

Let  us  write  down  all  expressions  so  formed  from  the  table  for  the  machine  and 
separate  them  by  semi-colons.  In  this  way  we  obtain  a  complete  description  of  the 
machine.  In  this  description  we  shall  replace  q,-  by  the  letter  “D”  followed  by  the 
letter  “A”  repeated  i  times,  and  Sj  by  “D”  followed  by  “C”  repeated  j  times.  This 
new  description  of  the  machine  may  be  called  the  standard  description  (S.D).  It  is 
made  up  entirely  from  the  letters  “A”,  “C”,  “D”,  “L”,  “R”,  “ N ”,  and  from 

If  finally  we  replace  “A”  by  “1”,  “C”  by  “2”,  “D”  by  “3”,  “L”  by  “4”,  “R”  by  “5”, 
“N”  by  “6”,  and  by  “7”  we  shall  have  a  description  of  the  machine  in  the  form 
of  an  arabic  numeral.  The  integer  represented  by  this  numeral  may  be  called  a 
description  number  (D.N)  of  the  machine.  The  D.N  determine  the  S.D  and  the 
structure  of  the  machine  uniquely.  The  machine  whose  D.N  is  n  may  be  de¬ 
scribed  as  cin(n). 


68  I  Alan  Turing 


To  each  computable  sequence  there  corresponds  at  least  one  description 
number,  while  to  no  description  number  does  there  correspond  more  than  one 
computable  sequence.  The  computable  sequences  and  numbers  are  therefore 
enumerable. 

Let  us  find  a  description  number  for  the  machine  I  of  §  3.  When  we  rename 
the  m-configurations  its  table  becomes: 


<21 

So 

PSu  R 

<22 

<22 

So 

PS0,  R 

<23 

<h 

So 

PS2,  R 

<24 

<24 

So 

PS0,  R 

<2i 

Other  tables  could  be  obtained  by  adding  irrelevant  lines  such  as 
qi  Si  PS,,  R  q2 

Our  first  standard  form  would  be 

qiS0SiRq2;  qiSoSoRqy,  q3SoS2Rqy,  q^SgSoRq,; 

The  standard  description  is 

DADDCRDAA  ;DAADDRDAAA  ;DAAADDCCRDAAAA  ; DAAAADDRDA  ; 

A  description  number  is 

31332531173113353111731113322531111731111335317 

and  so  is 

3133253117311335311173111332253111173111133531731323253117 

A  number  which  is  a  description  number  of  a  circle-free  machine  will  be  called 
a  satisfactory  number.  In  §  8  it  is  shown  that  there  can  be  no  general  process  for 
determining  whether  a  given  number  is  satisfactory  or  not. 


6.  The  universal  computing  machine 

It  is  possible  to  invent  a  single  machine  which  can  be  used  to  compute  any 
computable  sequence.  If  this  machine  CU  is  supplied  with  a  tape  on  the  beginning 
of  which  is  written  the  S.D  of  some  computing  machine  9 71,  then  *9/  will  compute 
the  same  sequence  as  Tit.  In  this  section  I  explain  in  outline  the  behaviour  of  the 
machine.  The  next  section  is  devoted  to  giving  the  complete  table  for  CU. 

Let  us  first  suppose  that  we  have  a  machine  Til'  which  will  write  down  on  the 
F- squares  the  successive  complete  configurations  of  Til.  These  might  be  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  same  form  as  on  p.  [62],  using  the  second  description,  (C),  with 
all  symbols  on  one  line.  Or,  better,  we  could  transform  this  description  (as  in  §  5) 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  69 


by  replacing  each  m-configuration  by  “D”  followed  by  “A”  repeated  the  appro¬ 
priate  number  of  times,  and  by  replacing  each  symbol  by  “D”  followed  by  “C” 
repeated  the  appropriate  number  of  times.  The  numbers  of  letters  “A”  and  “C” 
are  to  agree  with  the  numbers  chosen  in  §  5,  so  that,  in  particular,  “0”  is  replaced 
by  “DC”,  “1”  by  “DCC”,  and  the  blanks  by  “D”.  These  substitutions  are  to  be 
made  after  the  complete  configurations  have  been  put  together,  as  in  (C). 
Difficulties  arise  if  we  do  the  substitution  first.  In  each  complete  configuration 
the  blanks  would  all  have  to  be  replaced  by  “D”,  so  that  the  complete  configura¬ 
tion  would  not  be  expressed  as  a  finite  sequence  of  symbols. 

If  in  the  description  of  the  machine  II  of  §  3  we  replace  “o”  by  “DAA”,  “a”  by 
“DCCC”,  “q”  by  “DAAA”,  then  the  sequence  (C)  becomes: 

DA  :  DCCCDCCCDAADCDDC  :  DCCCDCCCDAAADCDDC  :  . . .  (Q) 

(This  is  the  sequence  of  symbols  on  F-squares.) 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  if  'M  can  be  constructed,  then  so  can  CM! .  The 
manner  of  operation  of  'III'  could  be  made  to  depend  on  having  the  rules  of 
operation  ( i.e .  the  S.D)  of  9 71  written  somewhere  within  itself  (i.e.  within  9 ft1); 
each  step  could  be  carried  out  by  referring  to  these  rules.  We  have  only  to  regard 
the  rules  as  being  capable  of  being  taken  out  and  exchanged  for  others  and  we 
have  something  very  akin  to  the  universal  machine. 

One  thing  is  lacking:  at  present  the  machine  'i'll'  prints  no  figures.  We  may 
correct  this  by  printing  between  each  successive  pair  of  complete  configurations 
the  figures  which  appear  in  the  new  configuration  but  not  in  the  old.  Then  (Q) 
becomes 

DDA  :  0  :  0  :  DCCCDCCCDAADCDDC  :  DCCC. . . .  (C2) 

It  is  not  altogether  obvious  that  the  F-squares  leave  enough  room  for  the 
necessary  “rough  work”,  but  this  is,  in  fact,  the  case. 

The  sequences  of  letters  between  the  colons  in  expressions  such  as  (Ci)  maybe 
used  as  standard  descriptions  of  the  complete  configurations.  When  the  letters 
are  replaced  by  figures,  as  in  §  5,  we  shall  have  a  numerical  description  of  the 
complete  configuration,  which  may  be  called  its  description  number. 


7.  Detailed  description  of  the  universal  machine 

A  table  is  given  below  of  the  behaviour  of  this  universal  machine.  The 
m-configurations  of  which  the  machine  is  capable  are  all  those  occurring  in 
the  first  and  last  columns  of  the  table,  together  with  all  those  which  occur  when 
we  write  out  the  unabbreviated  tables  of  those  which  appear  in  the  table  in  the 
form  of  m-functions.  E.g.,  e(artf)  appears  in  the  table  and  is  an  m-function.  Its 
unabbreviated  table  is  (see  p.  [66]) 


70  I  Alan  Turing 


e(cmf) 

ei(anf) 



R 

ei(cmf) 

not  3 

L 

e(cmf) 

Any 

R,  E,R 

ei(cmf) 

None 

ctnf 

Consequently  e i  (ctnf )  is  an  m-configuration  of  c U . 

When  CU  is  ready  to  start  work  the  tape  running  through  it  bears  on  it  the 
symbol  a  on  an  /'’-square  and  again  a  on  the  next  //-square;  after  this,  on 
F-squares  only,  comes  the  S.D  of  the  machine  followed  by  a  double  colon 
(a  single  symbol,  on  an  F-square).  The  S.D  consists  of  a  number  of  instructions, 
separated  by  semi-colons. 

Each  instruction  consists  of  five  consecutive  parts 

(i)  “D”  followed  by  a  sequence  of  letters  “A”.  This  describes  the  relevant 
m-configuration. 

(ii)  “D”  followed  by  a  sequence  of  letters  “C”.  This  describes  the  scanned 
symbol. 

(iii)  “D”  followed  by  another  sequence  of  letters  “C”.  This  describes  the 
symbol  into  which  the  scanned  symbol  is  to  be  changed. 

(iv)  “F”,  “F”,  or  “N”,  describing  whether  the  machine  is  to  move  to  left,  right, 
or  not  at  all. 

(v)  “D”  followed  by  a  sequence  of  letters  “A”.  This  describes  the  final  m- 
configuration. 


The  machine  CU  is  to  be  capable  of  printing  “A”,  “C”,  “D”,  “0”,  “1”,  “v”, 

“tv”,  “z”.  The  S.D  is  formed  from  “A”,  “C”,  “D”,  “I”,  “F”,  “N”. 


Subsidiary  skeleton  table 


con(E,  a) 


condK,  a) 


(  Not  A  R,R 
\  A  L,  Pa,  R 

(A  R,  Pa,  R 

\  D  R,  Pa,  R 


con2(E,  a) 


(  C  R,  Pa,  R 

\  Not  C  R,R 


The  table  for 

b 

bi  R,  R,  P  :,  R,  R,  PD,  R,  R,  PA 


con(E,  a) 
C0tti(E,  a) 

C0tti(K,  a) 
con2(E,  a) 


con(g,  a).  Starting  from  an 
F-square,  S  say,  the  sequence  C  of 
symbols  describing  a  configuration 
closest  on  the  right  of  S  is  marked 
out  with  letters  a.  — >  E. 


C0tt2(E,  a)  con(E,  ).  In  the  final  configuration 
E  the  machine  is  scanning  the  square 

which  is  four  squares  to  the  right 
of  the  last  square  of  C.  C  is  left 
unmarked. 


fib!,  bi,  ::)  b.  The  machine  prints  :  DA  on 
ctnf  the  F-squares  after  : :  — »  ctnf. 


ctnf 

ctnfj 


0(anf1;  :)  Ctnf.  The  machine  marks  the 
condom,  y)  configuration  in  the  last  complete 
configuration  with  y.  — »  font. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  71 


font 


;  R,  Pz,  L 

z  L,L 

not  z  nor  ;  L 


con(fmp,  x) 

font 

font 


tap 


cpe(e(fom,  x,  y),  Sim,  x,  y) 


Join.  The  machine  finds  the 
last  semi-colon  not  marked 
with  z.  It  marks  this  semi-colon 
with  z  and  the  configuration 
following  it  with  x. 

tap.  The  machine  compares 
the  sequences  marked  x  and  y. 
It  erases  all  letters  x  and  y.  — » 
Sim  if  they  are  alike.  Otherwise 
— ► font. 


Ctrtf.  Taking  the  long  view,  the  last  instruction  relevant  to  the  last  configura¬ 
tion  is  found.  It  can  be  recognised  afterwards  as  the  instruction  following  the  last 
semi-colon  marked  z.  — >  §\xn. 


Sim 

§inti 

§im2 


§im3 


iA 

not  A 
J  not  A 

\A 


f'(§tai,  §tai,  z) 
con(§im2,  ) 

§ta3 

R,  Pu,  R,  R,  R  Sim2 

L,  Py  e(mf,  z) 

L,  Py,  R,  R,  R  §im3 


§tm.  The  machine  marks  out 
the  instructions.  That  part  of 
the  instructions  which  refers  to 
operations  to  be  carried  out  is 
marked  with  u,  and  the  final 
m-configuration  with  y.  The 
letters  z  are  erased. 


mf 

fl(mf,  :) 

mfj  ■ 

not  A 

[A 

R,  R 

L,  L,  L,  L 

mfi 

mf2 

f  C  R, 

Px,  L,  L,  L 

mf2 

mf2  • 

. 

• 

tnf4 

,  D  R, 

Px,  L,  L,  L 

mf3 

mf3  ■ 

not  : 

R,  Pv,  L,  L,  L 

mf3 

mf4 

mf4 

con(I(I(mf5) ), 

mf5  < 

Any 

,  None 

R,  Pw,  R 

P: 

mf5 

m 

f(§f)!,  in§t,  u) 

§t)i 

L,  L,  L 

St)2 

§i)2  ■ 

D 

.  not  D 

R,  R,  R,  R 

§fl2 

in§t 

§i)3  ■ 

c 

R,  R 

)4 

.  not  C 

inSt 

mf.  The  last  complete 
configuration  is  marked  out 
into  four  sections.  The 
configuration  is  left  unmarked. 
The  symbol  directly  preceding 
it  is  marked  with  x.  The 
remainder  of  the  complete 
configuration  is  divided  into 
two  parts,  of  which  the  first  is 
marked  with  v  and  the  last 
with  w.  A  colon  is  printed 
after  the  whole.  — ►  §1). 


§1).  The  instructions  (marked 
u)  are  examined.  If  it  is  found 
that  they  involve  “Print  0”  or 
“Print  1”,  then  0  :  or  1  :  is 
printed  at  the  end. 


72  1  Alan  Turing 

St)4  ■ 

f  C  R, 

R 

.  not  C 

pe2(tn§f,  0,  : ) 

§t)5  ■ 

r 

tn§f 

.  not  C 

pe2(tn§f,  l,  : ) 

in  St 

g(I(in§ti 

,  u) 

tn§fi 

a  R,  E 

insti(a) 

tn§fi(L) 

ce5(ofi,  v 

y,  x,  u 

w) 

inSt^R) 

ce5(on,  v, 

x,  u,  y, 

w ) 

tn§fi(N) 

ec5(ofi,  v, 

x,  y,  w, 

w) 

on 

e(anf) 

in§t.  The  next  complete 
configuration  is  written  down, 
carrying  out  the  marked 
instructions.  The  letters  u,  v,  w, 
x,  y  are  erased.  — »artf. 


8.  Application  of  the  diagonal  process 

It  may  be  thought  that  arguments  which  prove  that  the  real  numbers  are  not 
enumerable  would  also  prove  that  the  computable  numbers  and  sequences 
cannot  be  enumerable.4  It  might,  for  instance,  be  thought  that  the  limit  of  a 
sequence  of  computable  numbers  must  be  computable.  This  is  clearly  only  true  if 
the  sequence  of  computable  numbers  is  defined  by  some  rule. 

Or  we  might  apply  the  diagonal  process.  “If  the  computable  sequences  are 
enumerable,  let  an  be  the  n-th  computable  sequence,  and  let  <f>n{m )  be  the  m-th 
figure  in  an.  Let  [3  be  the  sequence  with  1  —  )  as  its  n-th  figure.  Since  (3  is 

computable,  there  exists  a  number  K  such  that  1  —  4>n(n)  =  4>K(n)  all  n.  Putting 
n  =  K,  we  have  1  =  2 <j)K(K),  i.e.  1  is  even.  This  is  impossible.  The  computable 
sequences  are  therefore  not  enumerable.” 

The  fallacy  in  this  argument  lies  in  the  assumption  that  (3  is  computable.  It 
would  be  true  if  we  could  enumerate  the  computable  sequences  by  finite  means, 
but  the  problem  of  enumerating  computable  sequences  is  equivalent  to  the 
problem  of  finding  out  whether  a  given  number  is  the  D.N  of  a  circle-free 
machine,  and  we  have  no  general  process  for  doing  this  in  a  finite  number  of 
steps.  In  fact,  by  applying  the  diagonal  process  argument  correctly,  we  can  show 
that  there  cannot  be  any  such  general  process. 

The  simplest  and  most  direct  proof  of  this  is  by  showing  that,  if  this  general 
process  exists,  then  there  is  a  machine  which  computes  (3.  This  proof,  although 
perfectly  sound,  has  the  disadvantage  that  it  may  leave  the  reader  with  a  feeling  that 
“there  must  be  something  wrong”.  The  proof  which  I  shall  give  has  not  this 
disadvantage,  and  gives  a  certain  insight  into  the  significance  of  the  idea  “circle- 
free”.  It  depends  not  on  constructing  (3,  but  on  constructing  (3',  whose  n-th  figure  is 
<£„(«)• 

Let  us  suppose  that  there  is  such  a  process;  that  is  to  say,  that  we  can  invent  a 
machine  3)  which,  when  supplied  with  the  S.D  of  any  computing  machine  'If l 


4  Cf  Hobson,  Theory  of  functions  of  a  real  variable  (2nd  ed.,  1921),  87,  88. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  73 


will  test  this  S.D  and  if  CM  is  circular  will  mark  the  S.D  with  the  symbol  and 
if  it  is  circle-free  will  mark  it  with  “s”.  By  combining  the  machines  S>  and  rU  we 
could  construct  a  machine  U  to  compute  the  sequence  (3'.  The  machine  3>  may 
require  a  tape.  We  may  suppose  that  it  uses  the  T-squares  beyond  all  symbols  on 
T-squares,  and  that  when  it  has  reached  its  verdict  all  the  rough  work  done  by  3) 
is  erased. 

The  machine  U  has  its  motion  divided  into  sections.  In  the  first  N  —  1 
sections,  among  other  things,  the  integers  1,2,  . . . ,  N  —  1  have  been  written 
down  and  tested  by  the  machine  3>.  A  certain  number,  say  R(N  —  1),  of  them 
have  been  found  to  be  the  D.N’s  of  circle-free  machines.  In  the  N-th  section  the 
machine  3)  tests  the  number  N.  If  Nis  satisfactory,  i.e.,  if  it  is  the  D.N  of  a  circle- 
free  machine,  then  R{N)  =  1  +  R{N  —  1)  and  the  first  R(N)  figures  of  the 
sequence  of  which  a  D.N  is  N  are  calculated.  The  R(N)- th  figure  of  this  sequence 
is  written  down  as  one  of  the  figures  of  the  sequence  (3'  computed  by  U.  If  N  is 
not  satisfactory,  then  R(N)  =  R(N  —  1)  and  the  machine  goes  on  to  the 
(N  +  l)-th  section  of  its  motion. 

From  the  construction  of  U  we  can  see  that  H  is  circle-free.  Each  section  of  the 
motion  of  U  comes  to  an  end  after  a  finite  number  of  steps.  For,  by  our 
assumption  about  3),  the  decision  as  to  whether  N  is  satisfactory  is  reached  in 
a  finite  number  of  steps.  If  N  is  not  satisfactory,  then  the  N-th  section  is  finished. 
If  N  is  satisfactory,  this  means  that  the  machine  whose  D.N  is  N  is  circle- 

free,  and  therefore  its  R(N)- th  figure  can  be  calculated  in  a  finite  number  of 
steps.  When  this  figure  has  been  calculated  and  written  down  as  the  R(N)- th 
figure  of  p',  the  N-th  section  is  finished.  Flence  &  is  circle-free. 

Now  let  K  be  the  D.N  of  U.  What  does  U  do  in  the  N-th  section  of  its  motion? 
It  must  test  whether  N  is  satisfactory,  giving  a  verdict  “s”  or  Since  N  is  the 
D.N  of  U  and  since  U  is  circle-free,  the  verdict  cannot  be  On  the  other  hand 
the  verdict  cannot  be  “s”.  For  if  it  were,  then  in  the  N-th  section  of  its  motion  U 
would  be  bound  to  compute  the  first  R{K  —  1)  +  1  =  T(N)  figures  of  the 
sequence  computed  by  the  machine  with  N  as  its  D.N  and  to  write  down  the 
R(K)- th  as  a  figure  of  the  sequence  computed  by  U .  The  computation  of  the  first 
T(N)  —  1  figures  would  be  carried  out  all  right,  but  the  instructions  for  calculat¬ 
ing  the  R{K)- th  would  amount  to  “calculate  the  first  R(K)  figures  computed  by  U 
and  write  down  the  R(K)- th”.  This  R{K)- th  figure  would  never  be  found.  I.e.,  U  is 
circular,  contrary  both  to  what  we  have  found  in  the  last  paragraph  and  to  the 
verdict  “s”.  Thus  both  verdicts  are  impossible  and  we  conclude  that  there  can  be 
no  machine  3>. 

We  can  show  further  that  there  can  be  no  machine  IS  which,  when  supplied  with 
the  S.D  of  an  arbitrary  machine  clfl,  will  determine  whether  I'll  ever  prints  a  given 
symbol  (0  say). 

We  will  first  show  that,  if  there  is  a  machine  %,  then  there  is  a  general  process 
for  determining  whether  a  given  machine  Ifl  prints  0  infinitely  often.  Let  CM\  be 


74  I  Alan  Turing 


a  machine  which  prints  the  same  sequence  as  Tfl,  except  that  in  the  position 
where  the  first  0  printed  by  Tfl  stands,  Tfl\  prints  0.  TfU  is  to  have  the  first  two 
symbols  0  replaced  by  0,  and  so  on.  Thus,  if  'Til  were  to  print 

A  B  A  0  l  A  A  B  0  0  1  0  A  B , 

then  T%\  would  print 

ABA0  1AAB0010AB... 

and  cltl’2  would  print 

ABA0  1AAB0010AB...  . 

Now  let  3  be  a  machine  which,  when  supplied  with  the  S.D  of  Tfl,  will  write 
down  successively  the  S.D  of  Til.,  of  Tfl i,  of  Tll2,  . . .  (there  is  such  a  machine). 
We  combine  CJ  with  i?  and  obtain  a  new  machine,  In  the  motion  of  ^  first 
^  is  used  to  write  down  the  S.D  of  Tfl,  and  then  tests  it,  :  0  :  is  written  if  it  is 
found  that  Tfl  never  prints  0;  then  3  writes  the  S.D  of  Tfl  i,  and  this  is  tested, :  0  : 
being  printed  if  and  only  if  TIT]  never  prints  0,  and  so  on.  Now  let  us  test  ^  with 
If  it  is  found  that  ^  never  prints  0,  then  Tfl  prints  0  infinitely  often;  if  ^ 
prints  0  sometimes,  then  Tfl  does  not  print  0  infinitely  often. 

Similarly  there  is  a  general  process  for  determining  whether  Tfl  prints  1  infi¬ 
nitely  often.  By  a  combination  of  these  processes  we  have  a  process  for  deter¬ 
mining  whether  Tfl  prints  an  infinity  of  figures,  i.e.  we  have  a  process  for 
determining  whether  Tfl  is  circle-free.  There  can  therefore  be  no  machine  ‘g. 

The  expression  “there  is  a  general  process  for  determining ...”  has  been  used 
throughout  this  section  as  equivalent  to  “there  is  a  machine  which  will  determine 
. . .”.  This  usage  can  be  justified  if  and  only  if  we  can  justify  our  definition  of 
“computable”.  For  each  of  these  “general  process”  problems  can  be  expressed  as  a 
problem  concerning  a  general  process  for  determining  whether  a  given  integer  n 
has  a  property  G(n )  [e.g.  G(n )  might  mean  “n  is  satisfactory”  or  “n  is  the  Godel 
representation  of  a  provable  formula”],  and  this  is  equivalent  to  computing  a 
number  whose  n-th  figure  is  1  if  G(»)  is  true  and  0  if  it  is  false. 


9.  The  extent  of  the  computable  numbers 

No  attempt  has  yet  been  made  to  show  that  the  “computable”  numbers  include 
all  numbers  which  would  naturally  be  regarded  as  computable.  All  arguments 
which  can  be  given  are  bound  to  be,  fundamentally,  appeals  to  intuition,  and  for 
this  reason  rather  unsatisfactory  mathematically.  The  real  question  at  issue  is 
“What  are  the  possible  processes  which  can  be  carried  out  in  computing  a 
number?” 

The  arguments  which  I  shall  use  are  of  three  kinds. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  75 


(a)  A  direct  appeal  to  intuition. 

(b)  A  proof  of  the  equivalence  of  two  definitions  (in  case  the  new  definition 
has  a  greater  intuitive  appeal). 

( c)  Giving  examples  of  large  classes  of  numbers  which  are  computable. 

Once  it  is  granted  that  computable  numbers  are  all  “computable”,  several 
other  propositions  of  the  same  character  follow.  In  particular,  it  follows  that,  if 
there  is  a  general  process  for  determining  whether  a  formula  of  the  Hilbert 
function  calculus  is  provable,  then  the  determination  can  be  carried  out  by  a 
machine. 

I.  [Type  (a)].  This  argument  is  only  an  elaboration  of  the  ideas  of  §  1. 

Computing  is  normally  done  by  writing  certain  symbols  on  paper.  We  may 
suppose  this  paper  is  divided  into  squares  like  a  child’s  arithmetic  book.  In 
elementary  arithmetic  the  two-dimensional  character  of  the  paper  is  sometimes 
used.  But  such  a  use  is  always  avoidable,  and  I  think  that  it  will  be  agreed  that  the 
two-dimensional  character  of  paper  is  no  essential  of  computation.  I  assume 
then  that  the  computation  is  carried  out  on  one-dimensional  paper,  i.e.  on  a  tape 
divided  into  squares.  I  shall  also  suppose  that  the  number  of  symbols  which  may 
be  printed  is  finite.  If  we  were  to  allow  an  infinity  of  symbols,  then  there  would 
be  symbols  differing  to  an  arbitrarily  small  extent.5  The  effect  of  this  restriction 
of  the  number  of  symbols  is  not  very  serious.  It  is  always  possible  to  use 
sequences  of  symbols  in  the  place  of  single  symbols.  Thus  an  Arabic  numeral 
such  as  17  or  999999999999999  is  normally  treated  as  a  single  symbol.  Similarly 
in  any  European  language  words  are  treated  as  single  symbols  (Chinese,  however, 
attempts  to  have  an  enumerable  infinity  of  symbols).  The  differences  from 
our  point  of  view  between  the  single  and  compound  symbols  is  that  the 
compound  symbols,  if  they  are  too  lengthy,  cannot  be  observed  at  one  glance. 
This  is  in  accordance  with  experience.  We  cannot  tell  at  a  glance  whether 
9999999999999999  and  999999999999999  are  the  same. 

The  behaviour  of  the  computer  at  any  moment  is  determined  by  the  symbols 
which  he  is  observing,  and  his  “state  of  mind”  at  that  moment.  We  may  suppose 
that  there  is  a  bound  B  to  the  number  of  symbols  or  squares  which  the  computer 
can  observe  at  one  moment.  If  he  wishes  to  observe  more,  he  must  use  successive 
observations.  We  will  also  suppose  that  the  number  of  states  of  mind  which  need 
be  taken  into  account  is  finite.  The  reasons  for  this  are  of  the  same  character  as 


5  If  we  regard  a  symbol  as  literally  printed  on  a  square  we  may  suppose  that  the  square  is 
0^ac^l,0^y^l.  The  symbol  is  defined  as  a  set  of  points  in  this  square,  viz.  the  set  occupied  by  printer’s 
ink.  If  these  sets  are  restricted  to  be  measurable,  we  can  define  the  “distance”  between  two  symbols  as  the 
cost  of  transforming  one  symbol  into  the  other  if  the  cost  of  moving  unit  area  of  printer’s  ink  unit  distance 
is  unity,  and  there  is  an  infinite  supply  of  ink  at  x  =  2,y  =  0.  With  this  topology  the  symbols  form  a 
conditionally  compact  space. 


76  I  Alan  Turing 


those  which  restrict  the  number  of  symbols.  If  we  admitted  an  infinity  of  states  of 
mind,  some  of  them  will  be  “arbitrarily  close”  and  will  be  confused.  Again,  the 
restriction  is  not  one  which  seriously  affects  computation,  since  the  use  of  more 
complicated  states  of  mind  can  be  avoided  by  writing  more  symbols  on  the  tape. 

Let  us  imagine  the  operations  performed  by  the  computer  to  be  split  up  into 
“simple  operations”  which  are  so  elementary  that  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  them 
further  divided.  Every  such  operation  consists  of  some  change  of  the  physical 
system  consisting  of  the  computer  and  his  tape.  We  know  the  state  of  the  system 
if  we  know  the  sequence  of  symbols  on  the  tape,  which  of  these  are  observed  by 
the  computer  (possibly  with  a  special  order),  and  the  state  of  mind  of  the 
computer.  We  may  suppose  that  in  a  simple  operation  not  more  than  one  symbol 
is  altered.  Any  other  changes  can  be  split  up  into  simple  changes  of  this  kind.  The 
situation  in  regard  to  the  squares  whose  symbols  may  be  altered  in  this  way  is  the 
same  as  in  regard  to  the  observed  squares.  We  may,  therefore,  without  loss  of 
generality,  assume  that  the  squares  whose  symbols  are  changed  are  always 
“observed”  squares. 

Besides  these  changes  of  symbols,  the  simple  operations  must  include  changes 
of  distribution  of  observed  squares.  The  new  observed  squares  must  be  immedi¬ 
ately  recognisable  by  the  computer.  I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they 
can  only  be  squares  whose  distance  from  the  closest  of  the  immediately  previ¬ 
ously  observed  squares  does  not  exceed  a  certain  fixed  amount.  Let  us  say  that 
each  of  the  new  observed  squares  is  within  L  squares  of  an  immediately  previ¬ 
ously  observed  square. 

In  connection  with  “immediate  recognisability”,  it  may  be  thought  that  there 
are  other  kinds  of  square  which  are  immediately  recognisable.  In  particular, 
squares  marked  by  special  symbols  might  be  taken  as  immediately  recognisable. 
Now  if  these  squares  are  marked  only  by  single  symbols  there  can  be  only  a  finite 
number  of  them,  and  we  should  not  upset  our  theory  by  adjoining  these  marked 
squares  to  the  observed  squares.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  marked  by  a 
sequence  of  symbols,  we  cannot  regard  the  process  of  recognition  as  a  simple 
process.  This  is  a  fundamental  point  and  should  be  illustrated.  In  most  math¬ 
ematical  papers  the  equations  and  theorems  are  numbered.  Normally  the 
numbers  do  not  go  beyond  (say)  1000.  It  is,  therefore,  possible  to  recognise  a 
theorem  at  a  glance  by  its  number.  But  if  the  paper  was  very  long,  we  might  reach 
Theorem  157767733443477;  then,  further  on  in  the  paper,  we  might  find  “... 
hence  (applying  Theorem  157767733443477)  we  have  ...”  In  order  to  make  sure 
which  was  the  relevant  theorem  we  should  have  to  compare  the  two  numbers 
figure  by  figure,  possibly  ticking  the  figures  off  in  pencil  to  make  sure  of  their  not 
being  counted  twice.  If  in  spite  of  this  it  is  still  thought  that  there  are  other 
“immediately  recognisable”  squares,  it  does  not  upset  my  contention  so  long  as 
these  squares  can  be  found  by  some  process  of  which  my  type  of  machine  is 
capable.  This  idea  is  developed  in  III  below. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  77 


The  simple  operations  must  therefore  include: 

(a)  Changes  of  the  symbol  on  one  of  the  observed  squares. 

(b)  Changes  of  one  of  the  squares  observed  to  another  square  within  L  squares 
of  one  of  the  previously  observed  squares. 

It  may  be  that  some  of  these  changes  necessarily  involve  a  change  of  state  of 
mind.  The  most  general  single  operation  must  therefore  be  taken  to  be  one  of  the 
following: 

( A )  A  possible  change  (a)  of  symbol  together  with  a  possible  change  of  state 
of  mind. 

(5)  A  possible  change  ( b )  of  observed  squares,  together  with  a  possible  change 
of  state  of  mind. 

The  operation  actually  performed  is  determined,  as  has  been  suggested  on 
p.  [75],  by  the  state  of  mind  of  the  computer  and  the  observed  symbols.  In 
particular,  they  determine  the  state  of  mind  of  the  computer  after  the  operation 
is  carried  out. 

We  may  now  construct  a  machine  to  do  the  work  of  this  computer.  To  each 
state  of  mind  of  the  computer  corresponds  an  “m-configuration”  of  the  machine. 
The  machine  scans  B  squares  corresponding  to  the  B  squares  observed  by  the 
computer.  In  any  move  the  machine  can  change  a  symbol  on  a  scanned  square  or 
can  change  any  one  of  the  scanned  squares  to  another  square  distant  not  more 
than  L  squares  from  one  of  the  other  scanned  squares.  The  move  which  is  done, 
and  the  succeeding  configuration,  are  determined  by  the  scanned  symbol  and  the 
m-configuration.  The  machines  just  described  do  not  differ  very  essentially  from 
computing  machines  as  defined  in  §  2,  and  corresponding  to  any  machine  of  this 
type  a  computing  machine  can  be  constructed  to  compute  the  same  sequence, 
that  is  to  say  the  sequence  computed  by  the  computer. 

II.  [Type  (&)]. 

If  the  notation  of  the  Hilbert  functional  calculus6  is  modified  so  as  to  be 
systematic,  and  so  as  to  involve  only  a  finite  number  of  symbols,  it  becomes 
possible  to  construct  an  automatic7  machine  9C,  which  will  find  all  the 
provable  formulae  of  the  calculus.8 


6  The  expression  “the  functional  calculus”  is  used  throughout  to  mean  the  restricted  Hilbert  functional 
calculus. 

7  It  is  most  natural  to  construct  first  a  choice  machine  (§2)  to  do  this.  But  it  is  then  easy  to  construct  the 
required  automatic  machine.  We  can  suppose  that  the  choices  are  always  choices  between  two  possibilities  0 
and  1.  Each  proof  will  then  be  determined  by  a  sequence  of  choices  q,  h,  •  •  •  >  in  (h  =  0  or  1, 
*2  =  0  or  1,  . . . ,  in  =  0  or  1),  and  hence  the  number  2"  +  i\2n~l  +  i2ln~2  +  ...  +  /«  completely  determines 
the  proof.  The  automatic  machine  carries  out  successively  proof  1,  proof  2,  proof  3, . . .  . 

8  The  author  has  found  a  description  of  such  a  machine. 


78  I  Alan  Turing 

Now  let  a  be  a  sequence,  and  let  us  denote  by  Ga(x)  the  proposition  “The  x-th 
figure  of  a  is  1”,  so  that  —Ga(x)  means  “The  x-th  figure  of  a  is  0”.9  Suppose 
further  that  we  can  find  a  set  of  properties  which  define  the  sequence  a  and 
which  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  Ga(x)  and  of  the  propositional  functions 
N(x)  meaning  “x  is  a  non-negative  integer”  and  F(x,  y)  meaning  “y  =  x  +  1”. 
When  we  join  all  these  formulae  together  conjunctively,  we  shall  have  a  formula, 
91  say,  which  defines  a.  The  terms  of  91  must  include  the  necessary  parts  of  the 
Peano  axioms,  viz., 

(3u)N{u)  &  (x)(N(x)  — »•  (3 y)F(x,y))  &  (F(x,y)  — ►  N(y)), 
which  we  will  abbreviate  to  P. 

When  we  say  “91  defines  a”,  we  mean  that  —91  is  not  a  provable  formula,  and 


also  that,  for  each  n,  one  of  the  following  formulae  (A„)  or  (B„) 

is  provable.10 

91  &  F(n)  ■ 

-  Ga(u(n)), 

(A 

91  &  F(,,) 

■  (— Ga(«(n))), 

(B„). 

where  F(n)  stands  for  F(u,  iT )  &  F{u',  u")  &  . . .  F{u{n~l\  u{n)). 

I  say  that  a  is  then  a  computable  sequence:  a  machine  X- a  to  compute  a  can 
be  obtained  by  a  fairly  simple  modification  of  ^C. 

We  divide  the  motion  of  9Ca  into  sections.  The  n-th  section  is  devoted  to 
finding  the  n-th  figure  of  a.  After  the  (n—  l)-th  section  is  finished  a  double 
colon  : :  is  printed  after  all  the  symbols,  and  the  succeeding  work  is  done  wholly 
on  the  squares  to  the  right  of  this  double  colon.  The  first  step  is  to  write  the  letter 
“A”  followed  by  the  formula  (A„)  and  then  “B"  followed  by  (B„).  The  machine 
‘K-a  then  starts  to  do  the  work  of  9C,  but  whenever  a  provable  formula  is  found, 
this  formula  is  compared  with  (A„)  and  with  (B„).  If  it  is  the  same  formula  as 
(A„),  then  the  figure  “1”  is  printed,  and  the  n-th  section  is  finished.  If  it  is  (B„), 
then  “0”  is  printed  and  the  section  is  finished.  If  it  is  different  from  both,  then 
the  work  of  9C  is  continued  from  the  point  at  which  it  had  been  abandoned. 
Sooner  or  later  one  of  the  formulae  (A„)  or  (B„)  is  reached;  this  follows  from  our 
hypotheses  about  a  and  91,  and  the  known  nature  of  9C.  Hence  the  n-th  section 
will  eventually  be  finished.  is  circle-free;  a  is  computable. 

It  can  also  be  shown  that  the  numbers  a  definable  in  this  way  by  the  use  of 
axioms  include  all  the  computable  numbers.  This  is  done  by  describing  comput¬ 
ing  machines  in  terms  of  the  function  calculus. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  we  have  attached  rather  a  special  meaning  to  the 
phrase  “91  defines  a”.  The  computable  numbers  do  not  include  all  (in  the 
ordinary  sense)  definable  numbers.  Let  8  be  a  sequence  whose  n-th  figure  is 


9  The  negation  sign  is  written  before  an  expression  and  not  over  it. 

10  A  sequence  of  r  primes  is  denoted  by  (-r\ 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  79 


1  or  0  according  as  n  is  or  is  not  satisfactory.  It  is  an  immediate  consequence  of 
the  theorem  of  §  8  that  8  is  not  computable.  It  is  (so  far  as  we  know  at  present) 
possible  that  any  assigned  number  of  figures  of  8  can  be  calculated,  but  not  by  a 
uniform  process.  When  sufficiently  many  figures  of  8  have  been  calculated,  an 
essentially  new  method  is  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  more  figures. 

III.  This  may  be  regarded  as  a  modification  of  I  or  as  a  corollary  of  II. 

We  suppose,  as  in  I,  that  the  computation  is  carried  out  on  a  tape;  but  we  avoid 
introducing  the  “state  of  mind”  by  considering  a  more  physical  and  definite 
counterpart  of  it.  It  is  always  possible  for  the  computer  to  break  off  from  his 
work,  to  go  away  and  forget  all  about  it,  and  later  to  come  back  and  go  on  with  it. 
If  he  does  this  he  must  leave  a  note  of  instructions  (written  in  some  standard 
form)  explaining  how  the  work  is  to  be  continued.  This  note  is  the  counterpart 
of  the  “state  of  mind”.  We  will  suppose  that  the  computer  works  in  such  a 
desultory  manner  that  he  never  does  more  than  one  step  at  a  sitting.  The  note  of 
instructions  must  enable  him  to  carry  out  one  step  and  write  the  next  note.  Thus 
the  state  of  progress  of  the  computation  at  any  stage  is  completely  determined  by 
the  note  of  instructions  and  the  symbols  on  the  tape.  That  is,  the  state  of  the 
system  maybe  described  by  a  single  expression  (sequence  of  symbols),  consisting 
of  the  symbols  on  the  tape  followed  by  A  (which  we  suppose  not  to  appear 
elsewhere)  and  then  by  the  note  of  instructions.  This  expression  may  be  called 
the  “state  formula”.  We  know  that  the  state  formula  at  any  given  stage  is 
determined  by  the  state  formula  before  the  last  step  was  made,  and  we  assume 
that  the  relation  of  these  two  formulae  is  expressible  in  the  functional  calculus.  In 
other  words,  we  assume  that  there  is  an  axiom  91  which  expresses  the  rules 
governing  the  behaviour  of  the  computer,  in  terms  of  the  relation  of  the  state 
formula  at  any  stage  to  the  state  formula  at  the  preceding  stage.  If  this  is  so,  we 
can  construct  a  machine  to  write  down  the  successive  state  formulae,  and  hence 
to  compute  the  required  number. 


10.  Examples  of  large  classes  of  numbers  which 
are  computable 

It  will  be  useful  to  begin  with  definitions  of  a  computable  function  of  an  integral 
variable  and  of  a  computable  variable,  etc.  There  are  many  equivalent  ways  of 
defining  a  computable  function  of  an  integral  variable.  The  simplest  is,  possibly, 
as  follows.  If  y  is  a  computable  sequence  in  which  0  appears  infinitely11  often, 
and  n  is  an  integer,  then  let  us  define  £(y,  n )  to  be  the  number  of  figures 


11  If  HI  computes  y,  then  the  problem  whether  171  prints  0  infinitely  often  is  of  the  same  character  as  the 
problem  whether  9 71  is  circle-free. 


80  I  Alan  Turing 


1  between  the  «-th  and  the  (n  +  l)-th  figure  0  in  7.  Then  </>(«)  is  computable  if, 
for  all  n  and  some  7,  (/)(«)  =  £(7,  n).  An  equivalent  definition  is  this.  Let  H(x,y ) 
mean  <p(x )  =  y.  Then,  if  we  can  find  a  contradiction-free  axiom  ?4>  such  that 
?4  — >  P,  and  if  for  each  integer  n  there  exists  an  integer  N,  such  that 

94  &  Fm  ^  H(u(n),uWn))), 

and  such  that,  if  m  y  <f>(n),  then,  for  some  N', 

§4  &T(n'}  ->  (— H(«(n),  w(m)), 

then  <f>  may  be  said  to  be  a  computable  function. 

We  cannot  define  general  computable  functions  of  a  real  variable,  since  there  is 
no  general  method  of  describing  a  real  number,  but  we  can  define  a  computable 
function  of  a  computable  variable.  If  n  is  satisfactory,  let  y„  be  the  number 
computed  by  Tfl(  n),  and  let 

a„  =  tan(7r(y„-i)), 

unless  7,,  =  0  or  y„  =  1,  in  either  of  which  cases  a„  =  0.  Then,  as  n  runs  through 
the  satisfactory  numbers,  a„  runs  through  the  computable  numbers.12  Now  let 
<f>(n)  be  a  computable  function  which  can  be  shown  to  be  such  that  for  any 
satisfactory  argument  its  value  is  satisfactory.13  Then  the  function  f,  defined  by 
/(a„)  =  a ,£(„),  is  a  computable  function  and  all  computable  functions  of  a 
computable  variable  are  expressible  in  this  form. 

Similar  definitions  may  be  given  of  computable  functions  of  several  variables, 
computable-valued  functions  of  an  integral  variable,  etc. 

I  shall  enunciate  a  number  of  theorems  about  computability,  but  I  shall  prove 
only  (ii)  and  a  theorem  similar  to  (iii). 

(i)  A  computable  function  of  a  computable  function  of  an  integral  or 
computable  variable  is  computable. 

(ii)  Any  function  of  an  integral  variable  defined  recursively  in  terms  of 
computable  functions  is  computable.  I.e.  if  <f>{tn,  n)  is  computable,  and 
r  is  some  integer,  then  ;/(«)  is  computable,  where 

'7(0)  =  r, 

i](n)  =  <p(n,i]{n  -  1)). 

(iii)  If  <f>(m,  n )  is  a  computable  function  of  two  integral  variables,  then  (f>(n,n ) 
is  a  computable  function  of  n. 


12  A  function  an  may  be  defined  in  many  other  ways  so  as  to  run  through  the  computable  numbers. 

13  Although  it  is  not  possible  to  find  a  general  process  for  determining  whether  a  given  number  is 
satisfactory,  it  is  often  possible  to  show  that  certain  classes  of  numbers  are  satisfactory. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  81 


(iv)  If  (f>{n)  is  a  computable  function  whose  value  is  always  0  or  1,  then  the 
sequence  whose  n-th  figure  is  <j)(n)  is  computable. 

Dedekind’s  theorem  does  not  hold  in  the  ordinary  form  if  we  replace  “real” 
throughout  by  “computable”.  But  it  holds  in  the  following  form: 

(v)  If  G( a)  is  a  propositional  function  of  the  computable  numbers  and 

(a)  (3a)(3p){G(a)  &  (-G((3))}, 

(b)  G(a)  &  (-G((3))  -  (a  <  3), 

and  there  is  a  general  process  for  determining  the  truth  value  of  G(a),  then  there 
is  a  computable  number  <f  such  that 

G(a)  — >  a 
—  G( a)  — ->  a  3® 

In  other  words,  the  theorem  holds  for  any  section  of  the  computables  such  that 
there  is  a  general  process  for  determining  to  which  class  a  given  number  belongs. 

Owing  to  this  restriction  of  Dedekind’s  theorem,  we  cannot  say  that  a  com¬ 
putable  bounded  increasing  sequence  of  computable  numbers  has  a  computable 
limit.  This  may  possibly  be  understood  by  considering  a  sequence  such  as 

i  _i  _  l  _  l t_  i 

i>  2’  4’  8’  16’  2’  •  •  ■  ■ 

On  the  other  hand,  (v)  enables  us  to  prove 

(vi)  If  a  and  (3  are  computable  and  a  <  (3  and  <f>( a)  <  0  <  <f>{ (3),  where 
4>(oi)  is  a  computable  increasing  continuous  function,  then  there  is  a 
unique  computable  number  y,  satisfying  a  <  y  <  [3  and  0(y)  =  0. 

Computable  convergence 

We  shall  say  that  a  sequence  (3„  of  computable  numbers  converges  computably  if 
there  is  a  computable  integral  valued  function  N(e)  of  the  computable  variable  s, 
such  that  we  can  show  that,  if  e  >  0  and  n  >  N(e)  and  m  >  N(e),  then 

P„  -  (3m|  <  e. 

We  can  then  show  that 

(vii)  A  power  series  whose  coefficients  form  a  computable  sequence  of  comp¬ 
utable  numbers  is  computably  convergent  at  all  computable  points  in 
the  interior  of  its  interval  of  convergence. 

(viii)  The  limit  of  a  computably  convergent  sequence  is  computable. 

And  with  the  obvious  definition  of  “uniformly  computably  convergent”: 

(ix)  The  limit  of  a  uniformly  computably  convergent  computable  sequence 
of  computable  functions  is  a  computable  function.  Hence 


82  I  Alan  Turing 

(x)  The  sum  of  a  power  series  whose  coefficients  form  a  computable  sequence 
is  a  computable  function  in  the  interior  of  its  interval  of  convergence. 

From  (viii)  and  tt  =  4(1—  5  +  5—  ■••)  we  deduce  that  tt  is  computable. 

From  e  =  l+1+jf  +  ji+...we  deduce  that  e  is  computable. 

From  (vi)  we  deduce  that  all  real  algebraic  numbers  are  computable. 

From  (vi)  and  (x)  we  deduce  that  the  real  zeros  of  the  Bessel  functions  are 
computable. 

Proof  of  (ii) 

Let  H(x ,  y)  mean  “q(x)  =  y”,  and  let  K(x,  y,  z)  mean  “(f>(x ,  y)  =  z".  Sl^,  is  the 
axiom  for  (f>(x,  y).  We  take  SI,,  to  be 

&  P  &  (F(x,  y)  — >  G(x,  y))  &  (G(x,  y)  &  G{y,  z)  — >  G(x,  z)) 

&  ( F ^  —>H(u,  «<r>))  &  (F{v,  w)  &  H{v,  x)  &  K(w,  x,  z)  — >  H{ w,  z)) 
&  [H(w,  z)  &  G(z,  t)  v  G(f,  z)  — >  (— H(w,  f))]. 

I  shall  not  give  the  proof  of  consistency  of  SI,,.  Such  a  proof  may  be  con¬ 
structed  by  the  methods  used  in  Hilbert  and  Bernays,  Grundlagen  der  Mathema- 
tik  (Berlin,  1934),  p.  209  et  seq.  The  consistency  is  also  clear  from  the  meaning. 
Suppose  that,  for  some  n,  N,  we  have  shown 

SI,  &F(N)  -4H(m(”-1),  uWn-1))), 

then,  for  some  M, 

&  F(m)  -►  K(u{n\  uMn~l)),  u0l(n))), 

SI,  &  F(M)  -►  F(u(n^\  uM)  &  H^-V,  M("("-1))) 

&  K[u(n\  uMn~1)),  M("(n))), 

and 


St,  &  F(m)  -►  [F(«("-1), 

u(n))  &  H(m(,,_1), 

&K(u{n), 

„('/(»)))  H(«(n), 

Hence 

St,  &  f(m) 

-► H(u(n) , 

)• 

Also 

St,  &  F(r) 

'-H(h,  «("(0))). 

Hence  for  each  n  some  formula  of  the  form 


St,  &  F(M)  -►  H(U(n),  uWn))) 

is  provable.  Also,  if  M'  3s  M  and  M'  3=  m  and  m  ^(u),  then 
St,  &  F{m']  -f  G(m"((")),  u(m))  v  G(h('”\  H("(n))) 


and 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  83 


8l„  &F(m,)  ->  [{G(u("(n)),  u(m))  v  G(u('n),  u{"(n))) 

&  H(u(n), 

HW»))}  _  (-H(u{n),  u(m)))} 

Hence 

81  r,  &  F(m<) 

-H.  ( -H(u(n) ,  M(m))). 

The  conditions  of  our  second  definition  of  a  computable  function  are  there¬ 
fore  satisfied.  Consequently  >7  is  a  computable  function. 


Proof  of  a  modified  form  of  (Hi) 

Suppose  that  we  are  given  a  machine  cVl,  which,  starting  with  a  tape  bearing  on  it 
a  a  followed  by  a  sequence  of  any  number  of  letters  “F”  on  F-squares  and  in  the 
ffz-configuration  b,  will  compute  a  sequence  y„  depending  on  the  number  n  of 
letters  “F”.  If  4>n(m)  is  the  m-th  figure  of  y„,  then  the  sequence  |3  whose  «-th 
figure  is  </>„(»)  is  computable. 

We  suppose  that  the  table  for  CVL  has  been  written  out  in  such  a  way  that  in 
each  line  only  one  operation  appears  in  the  operations  column.  We  also 
suppose  that  E,  ©,  0,  and  1  do  not  occur  in  the  table,  and  we  replace  a 
throughout  by  ©,  0  by  0,  and  1  by  I.  Further  substitutions  are  then  made.  Any 
line  of  form 



we  replace  by 

§1 

and  any  line  of  the  form 

by  81 


P0 

P0 

Pi 

Pi 




re(93,  u,  h,  k) 


re(93,  b,  h,  k) 


and  we  add  to  the  table  the  following  lines: 


U 

Ui 

U2 

U3 


pe(u1(  0) 

R,  Pk,  R,  P®,  R,  P®  U2 

re(u3,  u3,  k,  h) 
pe(u2,  F) 


and  similar  lines  with  b  for  U  and  1  for  0  together  with  the  following  line 
C  R,  PE,  R,  Ph  b. 


We  then  have  the  table  for  the  machine  cYlJ  which  computes  |3.  The  initial 
ffz-configuration  is  C,  and  the  initial  scanned  symbol  is  the  second  a. 


84  I  Alan  Turing 

11.  Application  to  the  Entscheidungsproblem 

The  results  of  §  8  have  some  important  applications.  In  particular,  they  can  be 
used  to  show  that  the  Hilbert  Entscheidungsproblem  can  have  no  solution.  For 
the  present  I  shall  confine  myself  to  proving  this  particular  theorem.  For  the 
formulation  of  this  problem  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  Hilbert  and  Ackermann’s 
Grundzuge  der  Theoretischen  Logik  (Berlin,  1931),  chapter  3. 

I  propose,  therefore,  to  show  that  there  can  be  no  general  process  for  deter¬ 
mining  whether  a  given  formula  91  of  the  functional  calculus  K  is  provable,  i.e. 
that  there  can  be  no  machine  which,  supplied  with  any  one  91  of  these  formulae, 
will  eventually  say  whether  91  is  provable. 

It  should  perhaps  be  remarked  that  what  I  shall  prove  is  quite  different 
from  the  well-known  results  of  Godel.14  Godel  has  shown  that  (in  the 
formalism  of  Principia  Mathematica)  there  are  propositions  91  such  that 
neither  91  nor  —  91  is  provable.  As  a  consequence  of  this,  it  is  shown  that  no 
proof  of  consistency  of  Principia  Mathematica  (or  of  K)  can  be  given  within  that 
formalism.  On  the  other  hand,  I  shall  show  that  there  is  no  general  method 
which  tells  whether  a  given  formula  91  is  provable  in  K,  or,  what  comes  to  the 
same,  whether  the  system  consisting  of  K  with  —91  adjoined  as  an  extra  axiom  is 
consistent. 

If  the  negation  of  what  Godel  has  shown  had  been  proved,  i.e.  if,  for  each  91, 
either  91  or  —91  is  provable,  then  we  should  have  an  immediate  solution  of 
the  Entscheidungsproblem.  For  we  can  invent  a  machine  CK  which  will 
prove  consecutively  all  provable  formulae.  Sooner  or  later  CK-  will  reach  either  91 
or  —91.  If  it  reaches  91,  then  we  know  that  91  is  provable.  If  it  reaches  —91,  then, 
since  K  is  consistent  (Hilbert  and  Ackermann,  p.  65),  we  know  that  91  is  not 
provable. 

Owing  to  the  absence  of  integers  in  K  the  proofs  appear  somewhat  lengthy. 
The  underlying  ideas  are  quite  straightforward. 

Corresponding  to  each  computing  machine  Til  we  construct  a  formula 
Un  (TTl)  and  we  show  that,  if  there  is  a  general  method  for  determining  whether 
Un  (TTl)  is  provable,  then  there  is  a  general  method  for  determining  whether  TTl 
ever  prints  0. 

The  interpretations  of  the  propositional  functions  involved  are  as  follows: 

RSl(x,  y)  is  to  be  interpreted  as  “in  the  complete  configuration  x  (of  TTl)  the 
symbol  on  the  square  y  is  S”. 

I(x,  y)  is  to  be  interpreted  as  “in  the  complete  configuration  x  the  square  y  is 
scanned”. 


14  Loc.  cit. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  85 

Kq  (x )  is  to  be  interpreted  as  “in  the  complete  configuration  x  the  m-con- 
figuration  is  qm. 

F(x,  y)  is  to  be  interpreted  as  “y  is  the  immediate  successor  of  x”. 

Inst  {qjSjSkLqi}  is  to  be  an  abbreviation  for 

(x,  y,  x',  /){(.Rs.(x,  y )  &  I(x,  y)  &  Kq.(x)  &  F{x,  x')  &  F(y' ,  y)) 

(K*',  /)  &  Rsttf,  y )  &  Kqi(x’) 

&  (z)[F(/,  z)  V  (RSj(x,  z)  ->  Rsk{x!,  z))])}. 

Inst  {qiSjSkRqi}  and  Inst  {qjSjSkNqi} 

are  to  be  abbreviations  for  other  similarly  constructed  expressions. 

Let  us  put  the  description  of  til  into  the  first  standard  form  of  §  6.  This 
description  consists  of  a  number  of  expressions  such  as  “ qjSjSkLq  ”  (or  with  R  or 
N  substituted  for  L).  Let  us  form  all  the  corresponding  expressions  such  as  Inst 
{qiSjSkLqi}  and  take  their  logical  sum.  This  we  call  Des  (til). 

The  formula  Un  (till)  is  to  be 

(3 u)[N(u)  &  (x)(N(x)  ->  (3x')F(x,  x')) 

&  (y,  z)(F(y,  z)  — >  N(y)  &  N(z)) 

&  (y)RSo(u,  y)  &  I(u,  u)  &  Kqi(u)  &  Des  {‘M)] 

— >  (3s)(3f)[N(s)  &  N(t)  &  RSl{s,  £)]• 

[N(u)  &  ...  &  Des  (clfl-)]  may  be  abbreviated  to  A{CYYU). 

When  we  substitute  the  meanings  suggested  on  [pp.  84-85]  we  find  that 
Un  (cH'l)  has  the  interpretation  “in  some  complete  configuration  of  'fit,  Si  (i.e. 
0)  appears  on  the  tape”.  Corresponding  to  this  I  prove  that 

(a)  If  Si  appears  on  the  tape  in  some  complete  configuration  of  til,  then 
Un  (til)  is  provable. 

( b )  If  Un  (til)  is  provable,  then  Si  appears  on  the  tape  in  some  complete 
configuration  of  til. 

When  this  has  been  done,  the  remainder  of  the  theorem  is  trivial. 

Lemma  1.  If  Siappears  on  the  tape  in  some  complete  configuration  oftYl ,  then 
Un  (III)  is  provable. 

We  have  to  show  how  to  prove  Un  (III).  Let  us  suppose  that  in  the  «-th 
complete  configuration  the  sequence  of  symbols  on  the  tape  is  Sr(„,  o)> 
Sr(„,  i),  ...,  Sr(n>  „),  followed  by  nothing  but  blanks,  and  that  the  scanned 
symbol  is  the  i(n)- th,  and  that  the  m-configuration  is  qk(n)-  Then  we  may  form 
the  proposition 


86  I  Alan  Turing 


%,ti0)(«(n)>  U)  (M(n),  tft  &  ...  &«Sk^(m(b),  H(n)) 

&  J(u(n),  u(iM))  Ik  KqHn)(uM) 

&  (y)F((y,  «')  v  F(u,  y)vF(u',  y)v  .  ..vF(u{n-l\  y)vRSo(u(n\  y)), 
which  we  may  abbreviate  to  CC„. 

As  before,  F(u,  u')  &  F(u\  u")  &  ...  &  F(t/r_I\  u^)  is  abbreviated  to  F^r). 
I  shall  show  that  all  formulae  of  the  form  A(Tfl)  &  F^  — >  CC„  (abbreviated 
to  CFn)  are  provable.  The  meaning  of  CFn  is  “The  n-th  complete  configuration 
of  Til  is  so  and  so”,  where  “so  and  so”  stands  for  the  actual  n-th 
complete  configuration  of  Til.  That  CFn  should  be  provable  is  therefore  to  be 
expected. 

CFq  is  certainly  provable,  for  in  the  complete  configuration  the  symbols  are  all 
blanks,  the  m-  configuration  is  qi,  and  the  scanned  square  is  u,  i.e.  CCo  is 

(y)Rs<,(u,  y)  &  I(u,  u)  &  Kqi(u). 

A(Til)  — >  CCo  is  then  trivial. 

We  next  show  that  CFn  — >  CFn+1  is  provable  for  each  n.  There  are  three  cases 
to  consider,  according  as  in  the  move  from  the  n-th  to  the  (n  +  l)-th  configura¬ 
tion  the  machine  moves  to  left  or  to  right  or  remains  stationary.  We  suppose  that 
the  first  case  applies,  i.e.  the  machine  moves  to  the  left.  A  similar  argument 
applies  in  the  other  cases.  If  r(n,  i(n))  =  a,  r(n+  1,  i(n+l))  =  c, 
k(i(n))  =  b,  and  k(i(n+  1))  =  d,  then  Des  (Til)  must  include  Inst  { qaSbSdLqc } 
as  one  of  its  terms,  i.e. 

Des  (Til)  — »  Inst  {qaSbSdLqc}. 

Hence  A(T?l)  &  F("+1)  ->  Inst  {qaSbSdLqc}  &  F(,,+1). 

But  Inst  { qaSbSdLqc }  &  F(n+1)  — >  (CC„  — >  CC„+i) 

is  provable,  and  so  therefore  is 

A(Tll)  &  F{n+1)  ->  (CC„  ->  CC„+1) 

and 

(. A(TH )  &  F{n)  CC„)  (A(TH)  &  F(n+1)  cc„+1), 

i.e.  CFn  — >  CF„+i. 

CF„  is  provable  for  each  n.  Now  it  is  the  assumption  of  this  lemma  that  Si  appears 
somewhere,  in  some  complete  configuration,  in  the  sequence  of  symbols  printed  by 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  87 


972;  that  is,  for  some  integers  N,  K,  CCn  has  Rs,  (w<N),  u(K>  )  as  one  of  its  terms, 
and  therefore  CCn  — >  Rs,  ( u('N') ,  u{K) )  is  provable.  We  have  then 

CCN-^RSlUN\  u(k)) 

and  A(972)  &  FiN}  ->  CCN. 

We  also  have 

(3 «)A(972)  (3u)(3i/) . . .  (3n(N<)) (A(m)  &  Fm), 

where  N '  =  max(N,  K).  And  so 

(3 m)A(972)  ->  (3u)(3i/) . . .  (3u(N,))£Sl(w(N),  n(j:)), 

(3«)A(m)  ->  (3w(N))(3Mm)i?5l(M(N),  u(K)), 

(3 u) Ail'll)  -»•  (3s)(3f)i?51(s,  f), 

i.e.  Un  (W)  is  provable. 

This  completes  the  proof  of  Lemma  1. 

Lemma  2.  7/  Un  (977)  is  provable,  then  Si  appears  on  the  tape  in  some  com¬ 
plete  configuration  of  977. 

If  we  substitute  any  propositional  functions  for  function  variables  in  a 
provable  formula,  we  obtain  a  true  proposition.  In  particular,  if  we  substitute 
the  meanings  tabulated  on  pp.  [84-85]  in  Un  (977),  we  obtain  a  true  proposition 
with  the  meaning  “Si  appears  somewhere  on  the  tape  in  some  complete  con¬ 
figuration  of  977  ”. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  show  that  the  Entscheidungsproblem  cannot 
be  solved.  Let  us  suppose  the  contrary.  Then  there  is  a  general  (mechanical) 
process  for  determining  whether  Un  (977)  is  provable.  By  Lemmas  1  and  2, 
this  implies  that  there  is  a  process  for  determining  whether  977  ever  prints  0, 
and  this  is  impossible,  by  §  8.  Hence  the  Entscheidungsproblem  cannot  be 
solved. 

In  view  of  the  large  number  of  particular  cases  of  solutions  of  the  Entschei¬ 
dungsproblem  for  formulae  with  restricted  systems  of  quantors,  it  is  interesting 
to  express  Un  (977)  in  a  form  in  which  all  quantors  are  at  the  beginning.  Un  (977) 
is,  in  fact,  expressible  in  the  form 

(u)(3x)(w)(3ui) . . .  (3m„)33,  (I) 

where  ©  contains  no  quantors,  and  n  —  6.  By  unimportant  modifications  we  can 
obtain  a  formula,  with  all  essential  properties  of  Un  (977),  which  is  of  form  (I) 
with  n  =  5. 


88  I  Alan  Turing 

Added  28  August,  1936. 15 


Appendix 

Computability  and  effective  calculability 

The  theorem  that  all  effectively  calculable  (\-definable)  sequences  are  computable  and  its 
converse  are  proved  below  in  outline.  It  is  assumed  that  the  terms  “well-formed  formula” 
(W.F.F.)  and  “conversion”  as  used  by  Church  and  Kleene  are  understood.  In  the  second  of 
these  proofs  the  existence  of  several  formulae  is  assumed  without  proof;  these  formulae 
may  be  constructed  straightforwardly  with  the  help  of,  e.g.,  the  results  of  Kleene  in  “A 
theory  of  positive  integers  in  formal  logic”,  American  Journal  of  Math,  57  (1935),  153-173, 
219-244. 

The  W.F.F.  representing  an  integer  n  will  be  denoted  by  N„.  We  shall  say  that  a 
sequence  y  whose  n- th  figure  is  cj>y(n)  is  \-definable  or  effectively  calculable  if 
1  +  </>  (u)  is  a  \-definable  function  of  n,  i.e.  if  there  is  a  W.F.F.  M7  such  that,  for  all 
integers  n, 

{M7}(N„)  conv  N^(„)+1, 

i.e.  {M7}(N„)  is  convertible  into  \xy.x{x(y))  or  into  \xy.x(y)  according  as  the  n-th 
figure  of  A.  is  1  or  0. 

To  show  that  every  \-definable  sequence  y  is  computable,  we  have  to  show  how  to 
construct  a  machine  to  compute  y.  For  use  with  machines  it  is  convenient  to  make  a  trivial 
modification  in  the  calculus  of  conversion.  This  alteration  consists  in  using  x,  x',  x",  ...  as 
variables  instead  of  a,b,c,  ...  .  We  now  construct  a  machine  9g  which,  when  supplied  with 
the  formula  M7,  writes  down  the  sequence  y.  The  construction  of  9S  is  somewhat  similar  to 
that  of  the  machine  %  which  proves  all  provable  formulae  of  the  functional  calculus.  We 
first  construct  a  choice  machine  CCi,  which,  if  supplied  with  a  W.F.F.,  M  say,  and  suitably 
manipulated,  obtains  any  formula  into  which  Mis  convertible.  9 can  then  be  modified  so 
as  to  yield  an  automatic  machine  9^2  which  obtains  successively  all  the  formulae  into  which 
M is  convertible  (cf.  foot-note  p.  [77] ).  The  machine  9g  includes  9^2  as  a  part.  The  motion 
of  the  machine  9g  when  supplied  with  the  formula  M7  is  divided  into  sections  of  which 
the  n-th  is  devoted  to  finding  the  n-th  figure  of  y.  The  first  stage  in  this  //-th  section 
is  the  formation  of  {My}(N„).  This  formula  is  then  supplied  to  the  machine 
9g2,  which  converts  it  successively  into  various  other  formulae.  Each  formula  into  which  it 
is  convertible  eventually  appears,  and  each,  as  it  is  found,  is  compared  with 

Xxptx'PxKfxKx'))]],  i.e.  N2, 
and  with  \x[\x,[{x}(x,)]])  i.e.  Ni. 

If  it  is  identical  with  the  first  of  these,  then  the  machine  prints  the  figure  1  and  the 
n-th  section  is  finished.  If  it  is  identical  with  the  second,  then  0  is  printed  and  the 
section  is  finished.  If  it  is  different  from  both,  then  the  work  of  9^2  is  resumed. 


15  The  Graduate  College,  Princeton  University,  New  Jersey,  USA. 


On  Computable  Numbers  I  89 


By  hypothesis,  { My }(Nn)  is  convertible  into  one  of  the  formulae  N2  or  Ni;  consequently 
the  n-th  section  will  eventually  be  finished,  i.e.  the  n-th  figure  of  y  will  eventually  be 
written  down. 

To  prove  that  every  computable  sequence  y  is  X.-definable,  we  must  show  how  to  find  a 
formula  My  such  that,  for  all  integers  n, 

{My}(N„)  conv  Ni+^(„). 

Let  CM  be  a  machine  which  computes  y  and  let  us  take  some  description  of  the 
complete  configurations  of  by  means  of  numbers,  e.g.  we  may  take  the  D.N  of  the 
complete  configuration  as  described  in  §  6.  Let  cj  n)  be  the  D.N  of  the  n-th  complete 
configuration  of  'ftl.  The  table  for  the  machine  ')%  gives  us  a  relation  between  {(«  +  1) 
and  {(«)  of  the  form 

t(n+  1)  =  py{t(n)), 

where  py  is  a  function  of  very  restricted,  although  not  usually  very  simple,  form:  it  is 
determined  by  the  table  for  ctfL.  py  is  A.-definable  (I  omit  the  proof  of  this),  i.e.  there  is  a 
W.F.F.  Ay  such  that,  for  all  integers  n , 

{A, }(%„))  conv  %„+1). 

Let  U  stand  for 


\«[{{«}(A7)}(Nr)], 
where  r  =  £(0);  then,  for  all  integers  n, 

{ Uy}(Nn )  conv  N((n). 
It  may  be  proved  that  there  is  a  formula  V  such  that 


(  conv  Ni 


{{V}  (I%„+1))}  (!%„))< 


conv  N2 


conv  N2 


if,  in  going  from  the  n-th  to 

the  ( n  +  1 )  -th  complete  configuration,  the 

figure  0  is  printed. 

if  the  figure  1  is  printed, 
otherwise. 


Let  Wy  stand  for 


\«[{{V}({A,}({l77Ktt)))}({U,Ktt))], 


so  that,  for  each  integer  n , 


{{V}(Nt(n+l))}(NtM)  conv  {Wy}(Nn), 

and  let  Q  be  a  formula  such  that 


{{Q}(W7)}(Ns)  conv  Nr(z), 


90  I  Alan  Turing 


where  r(s)  is  the  s-th  integer  q  for  which  {W-y}(N„)  is  convertible  into  either  N\  or  N2. 
Then,  if  My  stands  for 

Xtv[{WY}({{Q}(WY)}(w))], 
it  will  have  the  required  property.16 

16  In  a  complete  proof  of  the  X-definability  of  computable  sequences  it  would  be  best  to  modify  this 
method  by  replacing  the  numerical  description  of  the  complete  configurations  by  a  description  which  can  be 
handled  more  easily  with  our  apparatus.  Let  us  choose  certain  integers  to  represent  the  symbols  and  the 
m-configurations  of  the  machine.  Suppose  that  in  a  certain  complete  configuration  the  numbers  represent¬ 
ing  the  successive  symbols  on  the  tape  are  S1S2 . . .  sn,  that  the  m-th  symbol  is  scanned,  and  that  the 
m-configuration  has  the  number  t;  then  we  may  represent  this  complete  configuration  by  the  formula 

[[■NsiJ-Nfc*  . . .  ,NSm_i]>  [Nt,Ns J,  [NSm+1,  ...  ,NS J], 
where  [a,  b]  stands  for  \u[{{u} (a)} (b)], 

[a,  b,  c]  stands  for  \u[{{{u}(a)}(b)}(c)], 

etc.