Practical Forms of Type Theory
Author(s): A. M. Turing
Source: The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 13, No. 2 (Jun., 1948), pp. 80-94 
Published by: Association for Symbolic Logic
Accessed: 01/02/2014 06:02
 .
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
 .
Journal of Symbolic Logic.

THU JOUBimAL OF SYMBOLIC LOGIC 
PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 
A. M. TURING 
Russell's theory of types,1 though probably not providing the soundest pos- 
sible foundation for mathematics, follows closely the outlook of most mathema- 
ticians. The present paper is an attempt to present the theory of types in forms 
in which the types themselves only play a rather small part, as they do in ordi- 
nary mathematical argument. Two logical systems are described (called the 
"nested-type" and "concealed-type" systems). It is hoped that the ideas 
involved in these systems may help mathematicians to observe type theory in 
proofs as well as in doctrine. It will not be necessary to adopt a formal logical 
notation to do so. 
1. The nested-type system for a finite universe. In this section the nota- 
tion of the nested-type system will be explained. The explanation will be in 
terms of the 'finite universe,' i.e. we start with a finite number of objects or 
'individuals' and build up other entities from these. We can then formulate 
certain rules which give valid results in this case and hope that they will apply 
in the infinite case also. We cannot of course hope that all such rules will work. 
We have to imagine that many rules of this kind have been tried, found wanting 
and rejected, and that others are still in use. This rather unsatisfactory-sound- 
ing process is as good an account as the author feels can be given of the way in 
which current mathematical procedure has grown up. But whatever the truth 
of this may be the finite universe provides a first class ground on which to de- 
scribe the nested-type system, and we proceed accordingly. 
Our finite universe has initially as its members the 'individuals' U1, ..* , UN- 
Although these include all the individuals, they need not exhaust our stock-in- 
trade, for we can also bring in functions taking the individuals as arguments and 
having them also as values. With our increased range of commodities we can 
then go into business again and produce a still greater variety of objects, and 
repeat without limit. There obviously arises a great variety of different kinds 
of functions which may need to be distinguished, but for the present system 
we need only trouble ourselves with the very broadest divisions, which will be 
called types. These divisions are described below. 
The individuals U1, -**, UN form type 0. 
The functions of individuals, taking individuals as values, together with the 
individuals themselves, form type 1. 
The functions of arguments in type 1, taking values also in type 1, together 
with the members of type 1, form type 2. 
The functions of arguments in type n, taking values also in type n, together 
with the members of type n, form type n + 1. 
Received January 6, 1947. 
1 A. N. Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, Principia mathematical, Cambridge, England, 
1925. 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 81 
It must be understood that by a "function" we mean the function itself and 
not merely one of its values. To illustrate the point by analogy with functions 
of a real variable, we should say that "sin" denotes a function, but that "sin 
0.3" and "sin x" do not, although the latter is often used (incorrectly in the 
author's opinion) as if synonymous with "sin". 
It is convenient to require functions to be defined throughout the appropriate 
type, i.e. not to permit such definitions as "f(O) = 0, but if x is different from 0 
then f(x) is undefined." In order to cover such cases we shall set apart from 
the outset a particular individual U, ,which we shall rename "C", to be the value 
of a function in all cases where it would normally be regarded as undefined. So 
far as possible we try to keep C on a par with the other individuals. We deviate 
from this principle by adopting the convention that the value of a function is 
always C unless the function is of higher type than the argument. (More 
strictly, if the function belongs to every type to which the argument belongs.) 
We respect the principle by refraining from considering every expression con- 
taining "C" to have the value C. 
The functions and individuals together will be known as terms. With our 
finite universe it is convenient to think of the functions as given by tables, con- 
sisting of two columns, in the first of which appear all the necessary arguments, 
and opposite them in the second column the appropriate values. Thus with 
N = 4 a typical member of type 1 would be represented by the table 
U2 U3 
(1) U1 Ui 
U3 U1 
U4 U4 
It would be a convenience to have the table rearranged with the first column in 
natural order. In the case of the above table (1) we should simply have to 
interchange the first two rows. Such a table may be said to be in normal form. 
We can do this for all tables of type 1, and when we have done so we are in a 
position to define a natural order for the members of type 1. With both tables 
in normal form, the earlier table is to be the one which has the earlier value in 
the last row in which the two tables differ. Thus the table (1) above precedes 
U1 U1 
(2) U2 U4 
U4 U4 
since when (1) is put into normal form the two tables differ last in the third row, 
and there (1) has the value U1 but (2) has the value U3. We shall also adopt the 
convention that the individuals in type 1 precede the tables. We may now con- 
tinue the numbering of terms so as to include all type 1, simply numbering them 
in the natural order just defined. The numbers will extend from 1 to N + NN. 
It may be verified that the above tables (1) and (2) are U205 and U241 respectively. 
A similar process may now be carried out for type 2 and then for type 3. In 

82 A. M. TURING 
general when we are dealing with type n we have already numbered the members 
of type n - 1. It is easily verified that those tables which have already appeared 
as members of type n - 1 have the order which they had in that type, and precede 
all the new tables. The order of any two tables (new or old) is that of the last 
pair of values in which they differ. 
Let us now introduce the notation (UV) to denote the result of looking up V 
in the table U; in slightly different words it is the entry against V in the table U.2 
In other words again it is the value of the function U for the argument V, and 
might therefore, in agreement with current mathematical practice have been 
denoted by U(V). Our conventions require (UV) to be C in cases where the 
table gives no information: these are just the cases where the lowest type to 
which U belongs does not exceed the lowest for V. We may also introduce the 
notation U = V to denote the identity of the terms U and V. It should be 
noticed that so long as U and V are tables known to belong to some particular 
type n we can establish their identity by showing that they have the same values 
throughout type n - 1 (this is known as the principle of extensionality and gives 
rise to the "axiom of extensionality"). The principle fails for individuals, for if 
U and V are individuals then (UX) is always identical with (VX), both being 
C, and yet U and V may well be different. The principle also fails when the 
types of the terms are unknown, for we can never then be sure that we have ex- 
amined sufficient arguments for the functions. There may be some argument 
in a higher type than we have yet considered for which the two functions differ. 
The expression U = V which we have just introduced denotes a proposition, 
unlike (UV) which was a term. Propositions may be thought of as having a 
value which is either truth (T) or falsity (F). By taking T and F to be indi- 
viduals we could have arranged for the propositions to be included amongst the 
terms, but we have not in fact done so. 
There are several other ways of forming propositions. If P and Q are proposi- 
tions then (U-..P) is a proposition whose value is opposite to that of P and (P D Q) 
is one whose value is F if and only if P is T and Q is F. We may read ('%.P) 
as "not P" and (P D Q) as "P implies Q." If U is a term then D' U represents 
the proposition that U is in type r, i.e. it is T if and only if U is in type r. 
We could of course introduce a great variety of further means for forming 
terms and propositions. We could for instance define (P & Q) as a proposition 
whose value is T if and only if both P and Q are T. We shall be content however 
with comparatively few, namely those we have already introduced, together 
with one further way of forming propositions and one of forming terms. These 
cannot be described without bringing in the ideas of "variable" and "formula 
with variables." Variables are of little importance except as parts of formulas. 
All we need say about them is that as a matter of notation small italic letters 
with any number of primes will be used as variables. The letters p, q, r, s, t, 
2 We shall use heavy type letters throughout to represent variables or undetermined 
formulas or tables. They occur only in metamathematical discussions. All our statements 
are understood to be true whatever substitutions of formulas (or tables, as the case may be) 
are made for the heavy type capital letters, and whatever substitutions of variables are 
made for the small heavy type letters. 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 83 
(possibly with primes) will be proposition variables and the others term variables. 
Small heavy type letters may be used to stand for any variable, with an obvious 
convention concerning the kind of variable. An example of a "formula with 
variables" is the expression x = U5. On substituting a term, e.g. U10 for the 
the term variable x it becomes a proposition. Similarly( U405 X) is a formula with 
variables: in this case substitution yields a term. In general a formula with 
variables or more briefly a formula is an expression which yields a term or proposi- 
tion on substituting terms and propositions for the (free) term and proposition 
variables respectively. The formulas may be called term formulas or proposition 
formulas according as they give rise to terms or propositions on substitution. 
The word free in the definition should be ignored for the present. 
We can now describe our remaining ways of forming terms and propositions. 
If P is a proposition formula with only the one free term variable x and no 
proposition variables then (ox, r) P is a term and (x, r) P is a proposition. Of 
these the term (Ox, r) P has the value C unless there is one and only one term 
U in type r for which the result SJP I of substituting U for x in P is T: if there 
is a unique U with this property then the value of (7x, r) P is that U. The value 
of the proposition (x, r) P is T if and only if all the results of substitution, S'P i 
with U in type r, have the value T. We may read (ox, r) P as "the x in type r 
such that P" and (x, r) P as "P, for all x in type r." 
Now consider the expression (x, 3) (x = y). In it there occur the two variables 
x and y. If we substitute a term, e.g. U6, for y we shall obtain a proposition, 
but if at the same time we substitute U9 for x we shall obtain nonsense. We 
would like to excuse ourselves from making this second substitution and admit 
(x, 3) (x = y) to membership of the class of formulas. Our excuse is that sub- 
stitution should only be made for the free occurrences of a variable, and that the 
occurrences of x in (x, 3) (x = y) are not free but bound. We say that a variable 
u occurs bound in a formula if the occurrence in question is in a part of form 
(7u, r)P or (u, r)P. Thus the first occurrence of x in (y, 1) [x = (1X, 0) (X = X)] 
is free and the others are bound. This expression is a proposition formula accord- 
ing to our definition. To verify this, first note that x = x is a proposition formula 
with no free variables other than x and that (ox, 0) (x = x) is therefore a term. 
Consequently U = (ox, 0) (x = x) is a proposition, and a fortiori a proposition 
formula, for any term U. It has no free variables orher than y (indeed it has 
none at all), and therefore (y, 1) [ U = (1X, 0) (x = x) ] must be a proposition for 
any term U, i.e. (y, 1) [x = (ox, 0) (x = x)] is a proposition formula. 
It will now be seen that terms and propositions are just term formulas and 
proposition formulas without free variables. 
Free and bound variables are familiar in mathematics though they are seldom 
consciously recognized. A typical example of a bound variable is that of x in the 
integral f x dx; x occurs free in the equation x(x - 1) = 0. A convenient 
method of distinguishing between bound and free variables is to make a sub- 
stitution of a constant (of the appropriate kind) for the variable in question. 
If nonsense results the variable is certainly bound: if sense results it is most 
probably free. Sense may perhaps result from substitution for a bound variable 

84 A. M. TURING 
if the result of the substitution and the original expression are interpreted ac- 
cording to different conventions. The double suffix summation convention 
of tensor theory provides an example of this. Using this convention the variable 
j in the expression aijbik is bound, but we can substitute 1 for j and obtain a 
perfectly sensible expression; it is sensible because it is interpreted without 
applying the double suffix convention. 
The outcome of our definition of "formulas" is that they will include terms, 
propositions, and variables. Also if A and B are term formulas, P and Q 
proposition formulas, x a term variable, and r a numeral representing a non- 
negative integer, then (A B) and (ax, r)P are also term formulas and (A = B), 
D' A, (U-..-P), (P D Q), and (x, r)P are proposition formulas. Our use of the letter 
"r" in these cases must not of course be confused with its use as a proposition 
variable. One further method of constructing formulas is worth mentioning 
although it is possible to do without it, and define it in terms already explained. 
This is "abstraction." If A is a term formula then (Xx, r) A is a term formula of 
type r + 1. It stands for the function whose value for the argument U in type 
r is S'JA provided that S'JA I is in type r for every Uin type r: if however there 
is a single argument U in type r for which S'JA I is not in type r then (Xx, r) A 
is C. We can define (Xx, r) A in previously explained terms as 
(7y, r + 1) (-[(x, r) (yx = A) DDOy]) 
where y is any variable not occurring free in A. 
In the case of a finite universe the individuals U1, . . ., UN form a part of the 
system. When dealing with an infinite universe this does not seem to be neces- 
sary, but it is convenient to retain symbols for three of them; these are U1 which 
is called C and which we have already mentioned, U2 which is called T' and U3 
which is called F'. These last two may be regarded as unofficial representatives 
of truth and falsity, looking after their interests amongst the terms: their official 
representatives are T and F which are propositions. The chief use of T' and 
F' is in connection with propositional functions. If we wish to express 'x is 
mortal' we form a function M which is defined for individuals (supposed to 
include mammals) and has the value T' for mortal arguments, F' for immortal 
arguments. Then "x is mortal" is written as Mx = T'. 
At this point we should pause and consider what we have done. We have 
defined a class of expressions which we have called term-formulas and proposi- 
tion-formulas, and which roughly correspond to the terms and propositions of 
mathematics. These formulas are given interpretations in the finite universe 
in terms of individuals and tables. Each term formula without free variables 
has an interpretation as a particular individual or table, and each proposition 
formula has an interpretation which is truth or falsity. We are able to determine 
whether a proposition formula without free variables is true by working out its 
interpretation, although this will be a very lengthy business unless the formula 
is very simple and N very small. The work involved in establishing the truth 
of formulas can be greatly reduced by the use of various rules, e.g. that if two 
formulas P, Q are true then -'(P D -'Q) is true. A process of application of such 
rules may be allowed to oust the process of working out the interpretation. 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 85 
Since the majority of the rules involved do not make any reference to the 
number N it is easy to forget the finite universe, and to allow the various rules 
to become reflex action. Eventually we break off almost all connection with the 
finite universe picture: in particular we repudiate such propositions as 
(x, r) (y, r) ((x $ y) D ((fx) $ (Jy))) D (x, r) (3 y, r) ((fy) = x) 
which are especially connected with such a picture. Finally we even repudiate 
the picture more violently by adopting an "axiom of infinity." 
This, in my opinion, is a very idealised but essentially correct account of how 
the present mathematical argument-form has grown up. The last step or two 
may appear very lame, but I think this cannot be helped: I think that these 
last steps are not really sound. 
One set of rules which can replace the finite universe picture is given below 
in ?2 (rules I-X, XI,). 
ABBREVIATIONS. At this point we are obliged to introduce a few conventions 
which permit us to abbreviate our formulas. The unabbreviated formulas 
would be disagreeably cumbrous. 
(a) We may introduce abbreviations by means of the arrow: a formula stand- 
ing to the left of an arrow is understood to be an abbreviation of that on the right 
of it. If heavy type letters appear in these expressions it is understood that the 
formula on the left is an abbreviation of that on the right for any meaningful 
substitutions of formulas for the heavy-type letters. With these conventions 
we introduce the abbreviations: 
(P & Q) (--(P D (Q))) 
(P v Q) ((U--P) ZD Q) 
(P - Q) ((P DQ) & (Q'DP)) 
(3x, r)P (,.((x, r)(,.P))) 
(3!x, r)P ((3x, r)P & (x, r)(y, r)(P $ SP D x = y)) 
(A s B) (-.,(A = B)) 
T (x, O)x= x 
F (AT) 
The variable y must not be free in P. 
(b) Formulas of form A & B & . . . & P we consider not to need any more 
brackets, since they have the same meaning in whatever manner the brackets 
are put in. Strictly speaking this equivalence only applies in virtue of rule IV 
below, and the reader may prefer to adopt some definite convention of his own 
as to the way the missing brackets are to be supplied. Similar considerations 
apply to formulas of form A v B v ... v P. 
(c) We shall often leave brackets out in cases where it is quite obvious how 
they should be replaced. Excessive bracketing often makes the formulas difficult 
to read. It is not thought worth while to introduce definite conventions in the 

86 A. M. TURING 
present paper: we rely on common sense instead. Likewise we permit altera- 
tions in the form of a pair of brackets. These common sense conventions have 
already been applied to some extent. 
2. Formal account of the nested-type system. We now describe the practical 
system in the usual formal manner, specifying what series of symbols are to be 
regarded as term-formulas, proposition formulas, variables, provable formulas, 
etc. We do not follow this aspect very far in the present paper, believing that 
mathematics is suffering more from lack of sound notation than from lack of 
rules of procedure. 
Term variables. The symbols a, b, . ., n, o, u, v, w, x, y, z, a', b', . . . are term 
variables. 
Proposition variables. The symbols p, q, r, s, t, p', q',... are proposition 
variables. 
Term formulas, proposition formulas, and formulas. Term variables are 
term-formulas. Terms (UH , UH2... ) are term formulas. Prosposition variables 
are proposition formulas. If A and B are term formulas and P and Q are 
proposition formulas and x is a term-variable and r a numeral representing a 
non-negative integer, then (A B) and (7x, r) P are term formulas and (A = B), 
(-P), (P D Q), DrA, (x, r)P are proposition formulas. Term formulas and 
proposition formulas are formulas. No expression is a term variable, term 
formula, proposition variable, proposition formula, or formula unless compelled 
to be so by the foregoing. 
Free and bound occurrences of variables. Each occurrence of a variable in a 
formula is either a bound or a free occurrence, but cannot be both. Occurrences 
of proposition variables are always free. The occurrence of the term variable 
X in the formula X is free. In the formulas (AB), (7 X, r) P, (A = B), (- P), 
(P D Q), DrA, ( X, r)P the occurrences of the various variables are free or bound 
according as they were free or bound in their corresponding occurrences in 
A, B, P, or Q except that the occurrences of X in ( X, r) P, (a X, r) P are bound. 
It may be observed that all four possible combinations concerning the presence 
or absence of a variable bound or free in a formula can occur. Examples are 
T', x, (Ox, O)(x = x), x = (ax, O)(x = x). 
Formulas and tautological formulas of the propositional calculus. The formulas 
of the propositional calculus are defined to be the least class of formulas contain- 
ing the propositional variables, and containing (P D Q) and (-P) whenever it 
contains P and Q. Tautological formulas of the propositional calculus are those 
which always give the value T if a substitution of values T or F is made for the 
variables, and the result then evaluated as follows: T DT is F, T D F is F, 
F D T is T, F D F is T, -T is F, OF is T. 
The rules of procedure (provable formulas). We word our rules of procedure 
in the form of a definition of the "provable formulas". Throughout, r is any 
numeral representing a non-negative integer. 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 87 
Rule I (Change of bound variables). The formulas 
(x, r)P (y, r) eSyPI 
(OX, r)P (1y, r) SYP| 
are provable if P is a proposition formula in which y does not occur free, and x 
is not free at a place where y would be bound. 
Rule II (Substitution). If P is provable, then SAP I and S7P I are provable, 
where A and Q are respectively term and proposition formulas, and the bound 
variables of P are distinct both from x and q and from the free variables of A 
and of Q. 
Rule III (Quantifiers). If either of the two formulas H D (Dtx D P), 
H D (x, r) P is provable, and x is not free in H, then the other is also provable. 
Rule IV (Propositional calculus). Any tautologous formula of the proposi- 
tional calculus is provable. 
Rule V (Modus ponens). If the formulas P D Q and P are both provable then 
Q is provable. 
Rule VI (Descriptions). If P is a proposition formula in which x does not 
occur bound, then the formulas 
(3!x, r)P D S(',,r)PpPI 
-.-(3!x, r)PD(ix, r)P = C 
Dr(ix, r)P 
are provable. 
Rule VII. The formula 
(x, r)Dr A D (3y, r + l)('-,Doy & (x, r) yx = A) 
is provable provided y does not appear free in the term formula A. 
Rule VIII (Axioms). For any numeral r representing a non-negative integer 
the following formulas numbered Al to C2 are provable: 
Al. C $ T' & C F' & T' F F' 
A2. DOC & DOT' & D0F' 
A3. [Dlx v (D`+1 x & -D'Dy)] xy = C 
A4. Drx D Dr+1x 
A5. Dv'+x ODDxy 
Bi. x= x 
B2. (y= x &y = z) D x = z 
B3. x= y (zx = zy & xz = yz) 
Cl. (x, r)fx = gx D[f = g v Dof v Dog v Dr+' f v D'+D g] 
(Axiom of extensionality.) 
C2. (3 i, r + 2) (f, r + 1) ((3 x, r)fx = T') D f(if) = T'] 
(Axiom of choice.) 
Rule IX (Axiom of infinity). The following formula is provable: 
C3. (3h, 1)(3v, O)(x, O)(y, O)[(hx = hy D x = y) & v 0 hx] 

88 A. M. TURING 
If we have a finite universe with N individuals instead of an infinite one we 
must replace rule IX by: 
Rule IXN. The following, Dl and D2, are provable: 
D1. D% x (x = UH v ... v UN) 
D2. U n U 
where m and n are different and not greater than N. 
We may make a number of remarks about these axioms and rules: 
(1) Axioms DI, D2 are rather stronger than is really necessary. Instead 
we could use the one axiom 
D X D (x = U' v ... V X = UN) 
which would be more nearly analogous to C3, but would admit the possibility 
of there being fewer than N individuals. 
(2) The second formula under rule VI might have been omitted. If this had 
been done it would have been necessary to define a new description operator 
in terms of the old one in such a way that the second formula would apply for 
the new operator. 
(3) It may be wondered why rules VI and VII do not appear under the axioms, 
yx = T' being written for P and yx for A. If there had been any more rules of 
this kind they could have been replaced by axioms, by making similar substitu- 
tions, but these axioms would only be equivalent to the corresponding rule in the 
presence of rules VI, VII. It will now be clear why rules VI, VII cannot them- 
selves be written as axioms. 
(4) A term Urn and its corresponding formula UH are not regarded as identical 
as they were in ?1. We have introduced a distinction rather similar to the 
distinction between the real and complex numbers 7r. This distinction will be of 
value in any attempt to provide a formal justification of the system in terms of 
tables: it would then be very embarrassing to have the same notation both for a 
formula and its interpretation. The author has carried through such a justifica- 
tion in detail, together with a proof that the system is complete for the finite 
universe. This provides a good check that no essential axioms have been 
omitted. The theorem mentioned in the next section provides a similar check. 
(5) Although rule III does not permit H D (D' x D P) to be deduced directly 
from H D (x, r) P if x is free in H, the deduction may be made indirectly. 
(6) The axiom of choice is optional, i.e. we may drop this axiom and still 
retain a system adequate for the greater part of mathematics. 
(7) We shall not carry out any proofs in this paper, but the following provable 
formulas are of interest: 
x = y D (Drx D Dry) 
(x, r)(P Q) D (7x, r) P = (7x, r)Q 
(x, r) A = B D (Xx, r) A = (Xx, r) B 
(x, r)D'A D (x, r)[((Xx, r)A)x = A] 
D`'+ (Ax, r) A 
(f,r)(g, r)[(x, r + l)(xf = xg) Df = g] 
D'+'x [(y, r + 1) ID'xy & (D'y v xy = C) I & D'+2x] 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 89 
3. Equivalence with Church's system. The nested-type system described 
above may be proved equivalent, in a certain sense, to Church's simplified theory 
of types.3 The proof is long and tedious, and would not justify publication, but 
it may be of interest to give an exact statement of the equivalence theorem. 
The form of "equivalence" used has a certain interest in itself. 
DEF[NITION. A logical system 1 will be said to be equivalent to the logical 
system 2 if to each proposition-like formula A of 1 we can make correspond a 
proposition-like formula A" .21 of 2, and conversely to each proposition-like 
formula P of 2 we can make correspond a proposition-like formula p(2,1) of 1, 
in such a way that 
(i) If A is provable in 1 then A(' 2) is provable in 2. 
(ii) If P is provable in 2 then p(2,1) is provable in 1. 
(iii) If A is a proposition-like formula of 1 then (A(1'2))2 A is provable 
in 1. 
(iv). If P is a proposition-like formula of 2 then (p(21))(12) P is provable in 2. 
(v) If A and B are proposition-like formulas of 1 then we can prove (A A B) (12) 
_ (A~l@= B(1,2)) in 2. 
(vi) If P and Q are proposition-like formulas of 2 then we can prove 
(P Q)(2,1) (pW2,l) Q(2,1)) in 1 
The formula A(' 2) must be an effectively calculable function of A and p(2,1) 
of P. 
It is understood that for each system there is defined a special kind of formulas 
called 'proposition-like formulas'; that every provable formula is necessarily 
proposition-like, and that it is a comparatively trivial matter to determine 
whether a formula is proposition-like or not. Specifically we may say that the 
statement "A is a proposition-like formula" should be equivalent to some state- 
ment of the form "so(n) = 0" where n is the Godel representation of A and so 
is some primitive recursive function. It is also understood that both systems 
"include the propositional calculus": this is required in connection with the 
logical equivalence signs in (iii) to (vi). 
We are justified in describing this relation as the equivalence of the two sys- 
tems, for the relation is transitive, symmetric, and reflexive, as I shall now show. 
The symmetry of the relation follows at once from the fact that interchange of 
systems 1 and 2 simply interchanges conditions (i) and (ii), (iii) and (iv), (v) 
and (vi). Reflexiveness is proved by taking A(") to be A. Transitivity is not 
quite so easy. We shall have to bring in a third system 3. We will define 
A""3) to be (A" 2))(2 3) and A(3") to be (A(3' 2))(2"). We assume conditions (i) 
to (vi) to hold for the pairs 1,2 and 2,3 and attempt to prove them for the pair 
1,3. Because of the symmetry it is sufficient to prove (i), (iii), (v). To prove 
(i) we must prove (A"' 2))(2,3) in 3 assuming A provable in 1. Now by (i) for the 
pair 1,2 we see that A" 2) is provable in 2, and then by (i) for the pair 2,3 we get 
(Ak 2))(23) in 3. To prove (iii) we must prove (((A" 2))=(23))(3,2))(2 l) _ A in 1. 
' Alonzo Church, A formulation of the simple theory of types, this JOURNAL, Vol. 5 (1940), 
pp. 5-S68. 

90 A. M. TURING 
Using (iii) for the pair 2,3 gives us ((A(12 A2 (i 2) whence by 
(ii) for the pair 1,2 we have 
(((A"'1 ,2)) (2,3)) (3,2) (1.2)) (2,1) 
Also by (vi) for the pair 1,2 we have 
(((A(' 2)) (2,8)) (3,2) = -A1'2)) (2,1) 
= ((((A(1' 2)) (2,3) ) (3,2)) (2,1) = (A 2)) (2,1) 
and by (iii) for the pair 1,2 we have 
(kt2)) (2.1) A 
Combining these last three results by the rules of the propositional calculus 
we obtain 
(((A(' 2))(23))(32))(2 l)-= A 
as required. 
To prove (v) for the pair 1,3 we must prove 
((A _ B)(1'2))(2,3)=-((A(1' 2))(2,3) _ (B( 2)) (23)) 
By an application of (v) to the pair 1,2 followed by an application of (i) to the 
pair 2,3 we get 
((A B)(12) = (A(' 2) = .2)))(2.3) 
and by an application of (v) to the pair 2,3 we have 
((A = B) 2) = (A(1'~ = B( 21)),22 32_ (((A = B)(1'2))(2'3) = (A"12) _ 2))(2,= 
Combining these by the propositional calculus gives 
((AB) (1,2)) (2,3) _ .( 2) _(12)) (2,3) ((A = B1')23 = (A"'2 " 
Condition (v) applied to 2,3 also gives 
((,2) = 12)) (2,3) _ ( (12)) (2,3) _ .12)) (2,3)) (k B" ~~= ((A("~~' (B= 
from which we now obtain the required result. 
Our definition of the equivalence of two systems could be summed up by 
saying that they are equivalent if we can translate from either system to the 
other in such a way that provable propositions translate into provable proposi- 
tions again, and so that a double translation gives rise to a proposition equivalent 
to the original. This explanation ignores the last two conditions (v) and (vi), 
which are rather too tenuous for such rough handling. 
The equivalence theorem then states that the nested-type system is equivalent 
to Church's system, if the proposition-like formulas of the nested-type system 
are taken to be the proposition formulas without free variables, and the proposi- 
tion-like formulas of Church's system are those of type o without free variables. 
4. Relaxation of type notation. The form of type theory which we have de- 
scribed is one in which the types themselves do not intrude very much. Even 
so they do still intrude to an appreciable extent, and it would be desirable to 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 91 
see how much further they can be relegated to the background. A possible way 
of doing so will be described in this section. 
We could sum up the effect of type theory as it appears in this system by 
saying that we give no meaning to the expressions 'for all x, A,' 'there exists an 
x, such that A,' 'the x, such that A,' 'the function whose value for argument x 
is A' (usually expressed symbolically as (x) A, (3x) A, (7x) A, (Xx) A, respec- 
tively). Instead we give meaning to the expressions (x, r) A, (3x, r) A, (ix, r) A, 
(Xx, r) A. Nevertheless in a large class of cases we can assign meanings to (x) A, 
(3x) A, (7x) A, (Xx) A in a satisfactory manner. A typical case is that of a formula 
of the form (ix) P where P is such that we can prove P DD'0x, say. In this case 
for any integers r, s > 10 we can prove (7x, r) P = (7x, s) P and it is therefore 
natural to stipulate that (ix)P shall stand for the common value of (1x, 10)P, 
(ix, 11)P, - - . We may say more generally that if (7x, ro) P = (ix, r) P is provable 
for all r > ro then (7x) P shall be said to be interpretable and to have the inter- 
pretation (Ox, ro)P. This is of course still only the beginning of a definition of 
"the interpretation of a formula with some type bounds omitted." In order to 
give the complete definition we must deal properly with formulas having free 
variables: results such as P ODD1x (quoted above) are not normally provable if 
P has free variables other than x. On this account we introduce the idea of 
"interpretability under hypotheses"; the hypotheses involved are usually of the 
form D'x. The complete definition is as follows: 
All variables and C, T', F' provide their own interpretations under any hy- 
potheses. 
If A, B, P, Q have interpretations A', B', P', Q' under certain hypotheses, 
then (A B), (A = B), D7A ,(P D Q), (U-,P) have the interpretations (A'B'), 
(A' = B'), DrA', (P' D Q'), (-P') respectively under the same hypotheses. 
If, for each r ' ro, P has the interpretation P, under hypothesis H & D'x where 
H does not contain x free and we can prove 
(A) H D (7x, ro)Pro = (ix, r)Pr 
then (ix) P has the interpretation (7x, ro) PO under hypothesis H. If instead of 
(A) we can prove 
H D [(x, ro) Pro- (x, r) Pr] 
then (x) P has the interpretation (x, ro) P under H. 
No formula has any interpretation unless compelled to by the foregoing. 
It may be observed that every formula of the nested-type system is inter- 
pretable and provides its own interpretation. Also that if H D K is provable 
and a formula has a certain interpretation under K then it has the same in- 
terpretation under H. 
If P has the interpretation P, under H & Drx and we wish to show either that 
(ix)P has the interpretation (ix, ro)P0, or that (3x)P has the interpretation 
(3x, ro) Pro under H, it is sufficient to prove Pr D DTrx (r > ro). 
It will be seen that this definition does not provide an effective means of de- 
termining whether or not an expression is interpretable. This need not be 

92 A. M. TURING 
considered a serious drawback, as we seldom need to establish that an expression 
is not interpretable. 
The most natural cases where we can apply the above definitions are those of 
(x)(A D B), (3x)(A &B), (7x)(A &B) where A D Dt~x is provable for some ro. 
It is fairly easy to remember which are the most important expressions A of this 
kind: e.g. in almost any formalization we shall have " 'x is a real number' DDr'xY 
with ro = 10 say; this fact would be remembered in the form "the class of real 
numbers is all right." It is not so easy to remember the appropriate numbers 
ro, but it is hardly necessary to do so if the notations (x) A etc. are adhered to 
throughout. When A is such that for some ro we can prove A D DDOx I shall call 
the class of x for which A is true a "noun-class." There is a very close connec- 
tion between the part played by the formulas A in our system and nouns in 
ordinary language; so much so that one might say that type theory had been 
instinctively obeyed for thousands of years before its discovery by Russell. 
This connection may be seen by translating (x) (A D B), (3x) (A & B), (7x) (A &B) 
roughly as "All A satisfy B," "There exists an A satisfying B" and "The A which 
satisfies B." In each case A is translated in the form of a noun. It seems that 
the necessity to use nouns prevents us automatically from committing type 
fallacies in common speech. We can probably only break down this 'safety 
device' by using nouns such as 'thing' or 'object' with the intended meaning 
'anything whatever.' In the case of the Russell paradox ('class of all classes 
which are not members of themselves') we use the word 'class' in very much that 
way. We use it to mean 'class of anythings whatever.' 
There are various ways in which we might make use of the idea of interpretable 
formulas to transform what we have called the 'nested type system' into some- 
thing rather more closely analogous to common mathematical practice. One 
possibility is simply to regard the formulas without types as abbreviations of the 
appropriate formulas of the nested-type system, such formulas only being used 
when the appropriate metamathematical result justifying the interpretation 
has been established. This does not seem to be really satisfactory because of 
the frequent need to prove such metamathematical results. Alternatively we 
may set up some new symbolic system in which the formulas form a considerably 
wider class than those of the nested-type system, and are all interpretable as 
defined above. The author has investigated two such systems. In one of them 
the expression. (x, A) P had the meaning which we have assigned to (x) (Ax = 
T' D P). This is always interpretable if A is interpretable and without free 
variables. This scheme leads to rather heavy formulas in the elementary stages, 
though it may have advantages when more advanced branches of mathematics 
are reached. The second system appears rather more hopeful, and will now be 
described briefly. It may be called the "concealed type" system. 
The formulas in the concealed type system will be described as "admissible 
formulas" to distinguish them from the formulas of the nested-type system. 
The admissible formulas will in fact be included amongst the interpretable for- 
mulas associated with the nested-type system. There will be admissible term 
formulas (ATF) and admissible proposition formulas (APF). We define APF, 
ATF, and provable formula by a simultaneous induction. Consequently there 

PRACTICAL FORMS OF TYPE THEORY 93 
is no rule for determining whether an expression is an admissible formula or not: 
this is not usual in logical systems, but there seems to be no good reason for a 
positive taboo on such an arrangement. We now give the inductive definitions. 
Every term variable is an ATF and every proposition variable is an APF. 
The symbols E, C, T', F' are ATF. 
If A, B, F are ATF and P, Q, R, S are APF, and P D Ax = T',-Q D Ax = T' 
are provable formulas then (3x) P, (x) Q, (B = F), (R D S), -R are APF, and 
(7x)P, (BF) are ATF. The variable x must not occur free in A. 
Free and bound occurrences of variables are defined as in the nested-type 
system. 
The symbol E corresponds to (Xx, 0) T' of the nested type system. Its main 
purpose is to take the place of Do and indirectly to replace the other D'. For 
any formula A we can prove ((Xx, 0) T') A _ DOA in the nested-type system. 
If A and B are ATF not containing x, y, or z free then the two expressions 
below are ATF, viz. 
(7y)(x)[(yxV yx = C) & #~-Ey & (yx _ (Axv Bx))] 
(7y)(x)[(yxV yx = C) & K-Ey & (yx -(z) (Bz D A(xz) & (- Bz D xz = C)] 
They may be abbreviated respectively to Sum A B and Pot A B. In these for- 
mulas we have adopted the useful convention that a formula of form A = T' 
may be abbreviated to A. The context will always enable one to determine 
when this abbreviation has been applied. We shall continue to use this con- 
vention. 
Strictly speaking the definitions of Sum AB and Pot AB are invalid because 
the bound variables x, y, z were not specified. This technical difficulty may be 
resolved by requiring x, y, z to be the three earliest variables not appearing 
free in A, B. 
The remainder of the definition consists of the axioms and rules of procedure. 
It may be remembered that these took the form of a definition in the nested-type 
system also 
Rules of procedure (concealed-type system). 
Rule I. The formulas 
(x)P (y)SPI 
(7x)P = (7y)SyPI 
are provable if (x)P is an APF in which x is not bound in P, y does not occur 
free, x does not occur at a place where y would be bound, and (7x)P is an ATF. 
Rule II. If P is provable, then S'Pj and SQPI are provable, where A and P 
are respectively an ATF and an APF, and the bound variables of P are distinct 
both from x and q and from the free variables of A and of Q. 
Rule III. If H D P and H D (x)P are both APF and one of them is provable 
then the other is provable also. 
Rule IV. Any tautologous formula of the propositional calculus is provable. 
Rule V. If the formulas P D Q and P are both provable then Q is provable. 

94 A. M. TURING 
Rule VI. If P is an APF in which x does not occur bound, then the formulas 
(3Sx) P D $X IX)PPI 
'3X(3Ix)PD(7x)P = C 
are provable provided they are APF. 
Rule VII. If A is an APF in which x, y, z, u do not occur free, then 
(x)(ux DzA) D (3y)[(Potzu)y & (x)(ux Dyx = A)] 
is provable. 
In rule VI the definition 
(3 !x) P (3x) P & (x)(y) (P & SXP D x-y) 
is understood, y standing for a variable not occurring free in P. 
The axioms are: 
Al CsT' &CsF' &T'5sF' 
A2 EC & ET' & EF' 
A3 Ex Dzy = C 
Bi x= x 
B2 (y =x &y = z) Dx = z 
B3 (x =y) D (zx = zy & xz = yz) 
Cl [(Pot yu)f & (Pot yu)g & (x)(ux D fx = gX)] D f = g 
C2 (3i)[(Pot u(Pot Eu))i & (f) {[(Pot Eu)f & (3x)fx] Df(if) I] 
C3 (3t)[(PotEE)t & (3v)[Ev & (x)(y) {(Ex & Ey) 
D ((tx = ty D x = y) & v ix) ]] 
To complete our inductive definition we need only add that no expression is 
an ATF, APF, or provable formula unless compelled to be so by the foregoing. 
We may say that roughly speaking type theory appears in the concealed type 
system only through the condition that P D Ax = T' must be provable if (7x) P 
is to be an ATF, and a similar condition for (x) P. The system is related to the 
nested-type system by the following metamathematical results: 
(1) If we substitute (Xx, 0) T' for E throughout an admissible formula without 
free variables we obtain an interpretable formula. 
(2) If in a provable formula of the concealed-type system without free variables 
we make the substitution mentioned in (1) and then form an interpretation of the 
resulting formula we obtain a provable formula of the nested-type system. 
(3) Every provable formula of the nested-type system is obtainable as in (2). 
A valuable aid in the proof of these is the following result which concerns the 
nested-type system only: 
(4) If A is a term formula containing only the variables xl, x2, ... , x. free, 
and ml, m2, * **, mn are non-negative integers, then there is an integer k such 
that Dtm xi & ... & DmIxn D DkA is provable. 
NATIONAL PHYSICAL LABORATORY, TEDDINGTON 

