

Chess  (1953) 

Alan  Turing 


Introduction 

Jack  Copeland 

Chess  and  Al 

Chess  and  some  other  board  games  are  a  test-bed  for  ideas  in  Artificial  Intelli¬ 
gence.  Donald  Michie — Turing’s  wartime  colleague  and  subsequently  founder  of 
the  Department  of  Machine  Intelligence  and  Perception  at  the  University  of 
Edinburgh — explains  the  relevance  of  chess  to  AI: 

Computer  chess  has  been  described  as  the  Drosophila  melanogaster  of  machine  intelli¬ 
gence.  Just  as  Thomas  Hunt  Morgan  and  his  colleagues  were  able  to  exploit  the  special 
limitations  and  conveniences  of  the  Drosophila  fruit  fly  to  develop  a  methodology  of 
genetic  mapping,  so  the  game  of  chess  holds  special  interest  for  the  study  of  the 
representation  of  human  knowledge  in  machines.  Its  chief  advantages  are:  (1)  chess 
constitutes  a  fully  defined  and  well-formalized  domain;  (2)  the  game  challenges  the 
highest  levels  of  human  intellectual  capacity;  (3)  the  challenge  extends  over  the  full 
range  of  cognitive  functions  such  as  logical  calculation,  rote  learning,  concept-formation, 
analogical  thinking,  imagination,  deductive  and  inductive  reasoning;  (4)  a  massive  and 
detailed  corpus  of  chess  knowledge  has  accumulated  over  the  centuries  in  the  form  of 
chess  instructional  works  and  commentaries;  (5)  a  generally  accepted  numerical  scale  of 
performance  is  available  in  the  form  of  the  U.S.  Chess  Federation  and  International  ELO 
rating  system.1 


History  of  Computer  Chess 

In  1945,  in  his  paper  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’,  Turing  predicted  that 
computers  would  probably  play  ‘very  good  chess’,  an  opinion  echoed  in  1949  by 
Claude  Shannon  of  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  another  leading  early  theoret- 


D.  Michie,  On  Machine  Intelligence  (2nd  edn.  Chichester:  Ellis  Horwood,  1986),  78-9. 


Chess  I  563 


ician  of  computer  chess.2  By  1958,  Herbert  Simon  and  Allen  Newell  were 
predicting  that  within  ten  years  the  world  chess  champion  would  be  a  computer, 
unless  barred  by  the  rules.3  Just  under  forty  years  later,  on  11  May  1997, 
IBM’s  Deep  Blue  beat  the  reigning  world  champion,  Gary  Kasparov,  in  a 
six-game  match. 

Turing  was  theorizing  about  the  mechanization  of  chess  as  early  as  1941. 
Fellow  codebreakers  at  GC  &  CS  remember  him  experimenting  with  two  heuris¬ 
tics  now  commonly  used  in  computer  chess,  minimax  and  best-first.4  The 
minimax  heuristic  involves  assuming  that  one’s  opponent  will  move  in  such  a 
way  as  to  maximize  their  gains;  one  then  makes  one’s  own  move  in  such  a  way  as 
to  minimize  the  losses  caused  by  the  opponent’s  expected  move.5  The  best-first 
heuristic  involves  ranking  the  moves  available  to  a  player  by  means  of  a  rule 
of  thumb  scoring  system  and  examining  the  consequences  of  the  highest- 
scoring  move  first. 


Turochamp 

In  1948  Turing  and  the  mathematical  economist  David  Champernowne  designed 
a  chess-playing  routine  known  as  ‘Turochamp’. 

Champernowne  later  gave  this  description  of  Turochamp: 

It  was  in  the  late  summer  of  1948  that  Turing  and  I  did  try  out  a  loose  system  of  rules  for 
deciding  on  the  next  move  in  a  chess  game  which  we  thought  could  be  fairly  easily 
programmed  for  a  computer.  My  long-suffering  wife,  a  beginner  at  chess,  took  on  the 
system  and  lost.  . . .  Here  is  what  I  think  I  remember  about  the  system  but  I  may  have 
been  influenced  by  what  I  have  since  read  about  other  people’s  systems.  There  was  a 
system  for  estimating  the  effects  of  any  move  on  White’s  estimated  net  advantage  over 
Black.  This  allowed  for: 

(1)  Captures,  using  the  conventional  scale  of  10  for  pawn,  30  for  knight  or  bishop,  50 
for  rook,  100  for  queen  and  something  huge,  say  5000,  for  king. 

(2)  Change  in  mobility;  i.e.,  change  in  the  number  of  squares  to  which  any  piece  or 
pawn  could  immediately  move  legitimately  (1  each). 

(3)  Special  incentives  for:  (a)  Castling  (3  points),  (b)  Advancing  a  passed  pawn  (1  or  2 
points),  (c)  Getting  a  rook  onto  the  seventh  rank  (4  points  perhaps). 

(I  don’t  think  occupation  of  one  of  the  4  central  squares  gained  any  special  bonus.  We  did 
not  cater  to  the  end-game.)  Most  of  our  attention  went  to  deciding  which  moves  were  to 


2  C.  E.  Shannon,  ‘Programming  a  Computer  for  Playing  Chess’,  Philosophical  Magazine,  41  ( 1950),  256-75. 

3  H.  A.  Simon  and  A.  Newell,  ‘Heuristic  Problem  Solving:  The  Next  Advance  in  Operations  Research) 
Operations  Research,  6  (1958),  1-10. 

4  Michie  in  interview  with  Copeland  (Oct.  1995). 

5  The  foundations  of  the  minimax  approach  were  laid  in  1928  by  von  Neumann  in  his  fundamental 
‘minimax  theorem’  (J.  von  Neumann,  ‘Zur  Theorie  der  Gesellschaftsspiele)  Mathematische  Annalen,  100 
(1928),  295-320). 


564  I  Jack  Copeland 


be  followed  up.  My  memory  about  this  is  infuriatingly  weak.  Captures  had  to  be  followed 
up  at  least  to  the  point  where  no  further  capture  was  immediately  possible.  Checks  and 
forcing  moves  had  to  be  followed  further.  We  were  particularly  keen  on  the  idea  that 
whereas  certain  moves  would  be  scorned  as  pointless  and  pursued  no  further  others  would 
be  followed  quite  a  long  way  down  certain  paths.  In  the  actual  experiment  I  suspect  we 
were  a  bit  slapdash  about  all  this  and  must  have  made  a  number  of  slips  since  the 
arithmetic  was  extremely  tedious  with  pencil  and  paper.  Our  general  conclusion  was 
that  a  computer  should  be  fairly  easy  to  programme  to  play  a  game  of  chess  against  a 
beginner  and  stand  a  fair  chance  of  winning  or  least  reaching  a  winning  position.6 

Turing  started  to  code  the  Turochamp  for  the  Ferranti  Mark  I  computer  at 
Manchester  University  but  he  never  completed  the  task.7 


The  First  Working  Chess  Programme 

Dietrich  Prinz,  who  worked  for  the  engineering  firm  Ferranti  Ltd.,  wrote  the  first 
chess  programme  to  be  fully  implemented.  It  ran  in  November  1951  on  the 
University  of  Manchester  Ferranti  Mark  I.8  Prinz,  like  Michie,  Strachey,  and 
others,  was  influenced  by  an  important  article  published  in  1950  by  Donald 
Davies,  ‘A  Theory  of  Chess  and  Noughts  and  Crosses’  (see  Further  Reading). 
Prinz  ‘learned  all  about  programming  the  [Mark  I]  computer  at  seminars  given 
by  Alan  Turing  and  Cecily  Popplewell’.9  (Like  Turing,  Prinz  wrote  a  program¬ 
ming  manual  for  the  Mark  I.10) 

Prinz’s  programme  was  for  solving  simple  problems  of  the  mate-in-two 
variety.11  The  programme  would  examine  every  possible  move  until  a  solution 
was  found.  On  average,  several  thousand  moves  had  to  be  examined  in  the 
course  of  solving  a  problem,  and  the  programme  was  considerably  slower  than 
a  human  player.  Unlike  Prinz’s  programme,  Turochamp  could  in  principle  play  a 
complete  game  and  operated  not  by  exhaustive  search  but  under  the  guidance  of 
heuristics. 

Prinz  saw  in  chess  programming  an  ‘indication  of  the  methods  that  might  be 
used  to  treat  structural  or  logistic  problems  occurring  in  other  fields  by  means  of 

6  Champernowne’s  account  is  from  a  letter  that  he  wrote  to  Computer  Chess  (4  (Jan.  1980),  80-1);  it  is 
published  here  by  permission  of  W.  and  R.  P.  Champernowne. 

7  D.  Michie,  ‘Game-Playing  and  Game-Learning  Automata’,  in  L.  Fox  (ed.),  Advances  in  Programming 
and  Non-numerical  Computation  (New  York:  Pergamon,  1966),  189. 

8  B.  V.  Bowden  (ed.),  Faster  Than  Thought  (London:  Pitman,  1953),  295. 

9  C.  GradweU,  ‘Early  Days’,  reminiscences  in  a  Newsletter  ‘For  those  who  worked  on  the  Manchester  Mk 
I  computers’,  Apr.  1994.  (I  am  grateful  to  Prinz’s  daughter,  Daniela  Derbyshire,  for  sending  me  a  copy  of 
Grad  well’s  article.) 

10  D.  G.  Prinz,  ‘Introduction  to  Programming  on  the  Manchester  Electronic  Digital  Computer’,  n.d., 
Ferranti  Ltd.  (a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.Alan 
Turing.net/prinz> ) . 

11  Prinz’s  programme  is  described  in  Bowden  (ed.),  Faster  Than  Thought,  295-7  and  in  D.  G.  Prinz, 
‘Robot  Chess’,  Research,  5  (1952),  261-6. 


Chess  I  565 


electronic  computers’.12  Prinz  used  the  Ferranti  Mark  I  to  solve  logical  problems 
(as  also  did  Audrey  Bates),  and  in  1949,  1950,  and  1951  Ferranti  built  three  small 
experimental  special-purpose  computers  for  theorem-proving  and  other  logical 
work.13  (This  was  several  years  before  the  Logic  Theorist  of  Newell,  Simon, 
and  Shaw — often  incorrectly  said  to  be  the  first  A1  programme — made  its 
debut  at  the  Dartmouth  conference  (see  ‘Artificial  Intelligence’,  above).) 


Turing’s  Approach  in  ‘Chess’ 

Turing  says  that  the  system  of  rules  set  out  in  ‘Chess’  is  based  on  an  ‘introspective 
analysis’  of  his  own  thought  processes  when  playing  (but  with  ‘considerable 
simplifications’).  His  system  anticipates  much  that  has  become  standard  in  chess 
programming:  the  use  of  heuristics  to  guide  the  search  through  the  ‘tree’  of 
possible  moves  and  counter-moves;  the  use  of  evaluation  rules  which  assign 
numerical  values,  indicative  of  strength  or  weakness,  to  board  configurations;  the 
minimax  strategy;  and  variable  look-ahead  whereby,  instead  of  the  consequences 
of  every  possible  move  being  followed  equally  far,  the  ‘more  profitable  moves 
[are]  considered  in  greater  detail  than  the  less’  (p.  571).  Turing  also  realized  the 
necessity  of  using  ‘an  entirely  different  system  for  the  end-game’  (p.  574). 

The  learning  procedure  that  Turing  proposes  in  ‘Chess’  involves  the  machine 
trying  out  variations  in  its  method  of  play — e.g.  varying  the  numerical  values 
that  are  assigned  to  the  various  pieces.  The  machine  adopts  any  variation  that 
leads  to  more  satisfactory  results.  This  procedure  is  an  early  example  of  a  genetic 
algorithm  or  GA  (see  ‘Artificial  Life’,  above). 


Chess  Bulldozers 

Turing  likened  the  claim  that  no  chess  programme  can  outplay  its  programmer 
to  the  claim  that  no  animal  can  swallow  an  animal  heavier  than  itself.  Both 
claims,  he  said,  ‘are,  so  far  as  I  know,  untrue’.  Fie  pointed  out  that  a  programme 
might  outplay  its  programmer  simply  in  virtue  of  ‘the  speed  of  the  machine, 
which  might  make  it  feasible  to  carry  the  analysis . . .  farther  than  a  man  could  do 
in  the  same  time’  (p.  575). 

Critics  question  the  worth  of  research  into  computer  chess.  Noam  Chomsky  has 
said  famously  that  a  computer  beating  a  grandmaster  at  chess  is  as  interesting  as  a 
bulldozer  winning  a  weight-lifting  competition.14  Deep  Blue  did  indeed  bulldoze 

12  Prinz,  ‘Robot  Chess’,  266. 

13  D.  G.  Prinz  and  J.  B.  Smith,  ‘Machines  for  the  Solution  of  Logical  Problems’,  in  Bowden  (ed.),  Faster 
Than  Thought,  ch.  15;  W.  Mays  and  D.  G.  Prinz,  ‘A  Relay  Machine  for  the  Demonstration  of  Symbolic  Logic’, 
Nature,  165/4188  (4  Feb.  1950),  197-8;  M.  A.  Bates,  ‘On  the  Mechanical  Solution  of  a  Problem  in  Church’s 
Lambda  Calculus’,  M.Sc.  thesis,  University  of  Manchester. 

14  N.  Chomsky,  Language  and  Thought  (London:  Moyer  Bell,  1993),  93. 


566  I  Jack  Copeland 


its  way  to  victory — 256  parallel  processors  enabled  it  to  examine  200  million 
possible  moves  per  second  and  to  look  ahead  as  many  as  fourteen  turns  of  play. 

The  huge  improvement  in  computer  chess  since  Turing’s  day  owes  much  more 
to  advances  in  hardware  engineering  than  to  advances  in  AI.  Massive  increases  in 
cpu  speed  and  memory  have  meant  that  successive  generations  of  machines  have 
been  able  to  examine  increasingly  many  possible  moves.  Turing’s  expectation  was 
that  chess-programming  would  contribute  to  the  study  of  how  human  beings 
think.  In  fact,  little  or  nothing  about  human  thought  processes  appears  to  have 
been  learned  from  the  series  of  projects  that  culminated  in  Deep  Blue. 


The  Turing  Test  Again 

In  the  introductory  paragraphs  of  his  essay,  Turing  touches  on  some  philosoph¬ 
ical  issues  ‘unconnected  with  chess’.  In  a  reference  to  the  imitation  game  (Chap¬ 
ter  11),  he  again  states  his  belief  that  one  could  ‘make  a  machine  which  would 
answer  questions  put  to  it,  in  such  a  way  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to 
distinguish  its  answers  from  those  of  a  man’  (p.  569).  On  the  question  of  what 
justification  there  is  for  this,  he  says  that  he  knows  of  ‘no  really  convincing 
argument  to  support  this  belief  and  certainly  of  none  to  disprove  it.’ 


Consciousness 

In  ‘Chess’  Turing  is  careful  to  distinguish  the  question  whether  one  could  make  a 
machine  that  would  play  the  imitation  game  successfully  from  the  question 
‘Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would  have  feelings  like  you  and  I  do?’ 
(p.  569).  Examples  of ‘feelings’  are  pleasure,  grief,  misery,  and  anger  (Chapter  1 1, 
p.  451).  The  assertion  ‘No  mechanism  could  feel’  forms  the  basis  of  the  objection 
to  the  Turing  test  that  in  Chapter  11  Turing  dubs  the  ‘Argument  from  Con¬ 
sciousness’.  His  remarks  in  the  present  chapter  clarify  the  discussion  that  he  gives 
of  this  objection  in  Chapter  11. 

The  answer  that  Turing  gives  in  ‘Chess’  to  his  question  ‘Could  one  make  a 
machine  which  would  have  feelings’  is  this  (p.  569):  ‘I  shall  never  know,  any  more 
than  I  shall  ever  be  quite  certain  that  you  feel  as  I  do.’  Thus  his  view  appears  to  be 
that  the  question  ‘Can  machines  think?’  is  independent  of  the  question  whether 
machines  can  feel,  and  that  an  affirmative  answer  may  be  given  to  the  former  in 
the  absence  of  our  having  any  answer  at  all  to  the  latter.  If  he  is  right — and 
arguably  he  is15 — then  the  assertion  ‘No  mechanism  could  feel’,  even  if  true,  goes 
wide  of  the  mark  as  an  objection  to  the  Turing  test.  As  Turing  sensibly  says  in 
Chapter  11  (pp.  452-3): 

15  See  section  3.1  (‘Is  Consciousness  Necessary  for  Thought?’)  of  B.  J.  Copeland,  Artificial  Intelligence:  A 
Philosophical  Introduction  (Oxford:  Blackwell,  1993). 


Chess  I  567 


I  do  not  wish  to  give  the  impression  that  I  think  there  is  no  mystery  about  conscious¬ 
ness.  . . .  But  I  do  not  think  these  mysteries  necessarily  need  to  be  solved  before  we  can 
answer  the  question  with  which  we  are  concerned  in  this  paper  [i.e.  ‘Can  machines 
think?’]. 


Consciousness  and  Computer  Simulation 

Turing  asserts  (p.  569)  that  in  the  case  of  the  questions  ‘Could  one  make  a 
machine  to  play  chess,  and  to  improve  its  play?’,  and  ‘Could  one  make  a  machine 
which  would  answer  questions  put  to  it,  in  such  a  way  that  it  would  not  be 
possible  to  distinguish  its  answers  from  those  of  a  man?’,  the  phrase  ‘Could  one 
make  a  machine  to . . .’  might  equally  well  be  replaced  by  ‘Could  one  programme 
an  electronic  computer  to...’.  On  pp.  569-70  Turing  supports  this  claim 
with  an  argument  that  also  appears,  in  somewhat  different  forms,  in  Chapters 
11  and  13: 

if  some  other  machine  had  been  constructed  to  do  the  job  we  could  use  an  electronic 
computer  (of  sufficient  storage  capacity),  suitably  programmed,  to  calculate  what  this 
machine  would  do,  and  in  particular  what  answer  it  would  give. 

(If  no  superior  method  presented  itself,  then  the  computer  could  be  supplied  with 
a  ‘look-up  table’  setting  out  the  behaviour  of  the  other  machine  (see  Chapter  11).) 

In  the  case,  however,  of  the  question  ‘Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would 
have  feelings  like  you  and  I  do?’,  Turing  indicates  (on  p.  569)  that  replacing  ‘Could 
one  make  a  machine  to. . .’  by  ‘Could  one  programme  an  electronic  computer 
to ...  ’  might  possibly  result  in  a  question  that  is  not  equivalent.  Turing  says  in 
Chapter  13  that  ‘any  machine  of  a  certain  very  wide  class’  can  be  replaced  equiva¬ 
lently  by  a  digital  computer,  but  notes  that  not  every  machine  can  be  so  replaced, 
giving  as  examples  of  those  that  cannot  bulldozers,  steam-engines,  and  telescopes 
(p.  483).  Presumably,  therefore,  Turing  considered  it  an  open  question  whether  a 
machine  capable  of  feeling  belongs  to  the  first  or  second  of  these  two  classes. 


The  Church-Turing  Thesis 

‘Chess’  contains  a  formulation  of  the  Church-Turing  thesis  that  does  not  appear 
elsewhere  in  Turing’s  writings  (p.  570): 

If  one  can  explain  quite  unambiguously  in  English,  with  the  aid  of  mathematical  symbols 
if  required,  how  a  calculation  is  to  be  done,  then  it  is  always  possible  to  programme  any 
digital  computer  to  do  that  calculation,  provided  the  storage  capacity  is  adequate. 

As  elsewhere  (e.g.  in  Chapter  10  (p.  414)  and  Chapter  17  (pp.  588-9)),  Turing 
emphasizes  here  that  this  thesis  ‘is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that  admits  of  clear  cut 


568  I  Jack  Copeland 


proof’,  but  nevertheless  ‘amongst  workers  in  the  field  it  is  regarded  as  being  clear 
as  day’  (p.  570).  (The  phrase  ‘how  a  calculation  is  to  be  done’  should  be 
understood  as  being  elliptical  for  some  such  phrase  as  ‘how  a  calculation  is  to 
be  done  by  an  obedient  clerk  working  in  accordance  with  a  systematic  method’.) 

Turing  applies  this  thesis  to  the  question  ‘Could  one  programme  an  electronic 
computer  to  play  a  reasonably  good  game  of  chess?’  He  points  out  that,  in  view 
of  the  thesis,  there  is  no  need  to  set  out  an  actual  programme  in  order  to  show 
that  the  answer  to  the  question  is  affirmative.  It  suffices  to  explain,  ‘unambigu¬ 
ously  in  English’,  the  rules  by  which  the  machine  is  to  choose  its  move  in  each 
position.  This  Turing  proceeds  to  do. 


Further  reading 

Davies,  D.  W.,  ‘A  Theory  of  Chess  and  Noughts  and  Crosses’,  Science  News,  16  (1950), 
40-64. 

Newborn,  M.,  Kasparov  Versus  Deep  Blue:  Computer  Chess  Comes  of  Age,  (Springer:  New 
York,  1997). 

Shannon,  C.  E.  ‘Programming  a  Computer  for  Playing  Chess’,  Philosophical  Magazine,  41 
(1950),  256-75. 

- ‘A  Chess-Playing  Machine’,  Scientific  American,  182  (1950),  48-51. 


Provenance 

Turing’s  essay  ‘Chess’  was  published  in  the  1953  collection  Faster  Than  Thought, 
where  it  formed  a  section  of  a  chapter  entitled  ‘Digital  Computers  Applied  To 
Games’.  (Edited  by  Vivian  Bowden,  Faster  Than  Thought  is  a  fascinating  survey  of 
the  then  state  of  the  art  in  digital  computing.)  The  chapter  was  co-authored  by 
Audrey  Bates,  Bowden,  and  Christopher  Strachey.  Bowden’s  editorial  remarks  do 
not  make  it  clear  which  parts  of  ‘Digital  Computers  Applied  To  Games’  were 
written  by  which  author.16  Fortunately,  Turing’s  typescript  of  his  contribution 
has  survived.17  It  is  this  which  is  printed  here.18 


16  The  whole  article  is  mistakenly  attributed  to  Turing  alone  in  Mechanical  Intelligence:  Collected  Works  of 
A.  M.  Turing,  ed.  D.  C.  Ince  (Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1992). 

17  Turing’s  typescript  is  itself  entitled  ‘Digital  Computers  applied  to  Games’.  In  Faster  Than  Thought 
Turing’s  essay  was  published  under  the  narrower  and  more  accurate  title  ‘Chess’.  The  typescript  is  among  the 
Turing  Papers  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  B  7). 

18  Bowden’s  edition  of  the  essay  differs  from  Turing’s  typescript  in  numerous  respects,  many  of  them 
minor.  The  present  edition  follows  Turing’s  typescript.  Some  obvious  typing  errors  have  been  corrected  and 
in  one  case  a  conjectured  missing  word  has  been  added  in  square  brackets.  Some  significant  differences 
between  the  typescript  and  Bowden’s  edition  are  mentioned  in  footnotes.  (Bowden’s  edition  is  reprinted  in 
Turing,  Mechanical  Intelligence,  ed.  Ince,  288-95.) 


Chess 


When  one  is  asked  ‘Could  one  make  a  machine  to  play  chess?’,  there  are  several 
possible  meanings  which  might  be  given  to  the  words.  Here  are  a  few: 

i)  Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would  obey  the  rules  of  chess,  i.e.  one 
which  would  play  random  legal  moves,  or  which  could  tell  one  whether  a 
given  move  is  a  legal  one? 

ii)  Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would  solve  chess  problems,  e.g.  tell 
one  whether,  in  a  given  position,  white  has  a  forced  mate  in  three? 

iii)  Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would  play  a  reasonably  good  game  of 
chess,  i.e.  which,  confronted  with  an  ordinary  (that  is,  not  particularly 
unusual)  chess  position,  would  after  two  or  three  minutes  of  calculation, 
indicate  a  passably  good  legal  move? 

iv)  Could  one  make  a  machine  to  play  chess,  and  to  improve  its  play,  game  by 
game,  profiting  from  its  experience? 

To  these  we  may  add  two  further  questions,  unconnected  with  chess,  which  are 
likely  to  be  on  the  tip  of  the  reader’s  tongue. 

v)  Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would  answer  questions  put  to  it,  in 
such  a  way  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  distinguish  its  answers  from 
those  of  a  man? 

vi)  Could  one  make  a  machine  which  would  have  feelings  like  you  and  I  do? 

The  problem  to  be  considered  here  is  iii),  but  to  put  this  problem  into 
perspective  with  the  others  I  shall  give  the  very  briefest  of  answers  to  each  of 
them. 

To  i)  and  ii)  I  should  say  ‘This  certainly  can  be  done.  If  it  has  not  been  done 
already  it  is  merely  because  there  is  something  better  to  do.’ 

Question  iii)  we  are  to  consider  in  greater  detail,  but  the  short  answer  is  ‘Yes, 
but  the  better  the  standard  of  play  required,  the  more  complex  will  the  machine 
be,  and  the  more  ingenious  perhaps  the  designer.’ 

To  iv)  and  v)  I  should  answer  ‘I  believe  so.  I  know  of  no  really  convincing 
argument  to  support  this  belief  and  certainly  of  none  to  disprove  it.’ 

To  vi)  I  should  say  ‘I  shall  never  know,  any  more  than  I  shall  ever  be  quite 
certain  that  you  feel  as  I  do.’ 

In  each  of  these  problems  except  possibly  the  last,  the  phrase  ‘Could  one  make 
a  machine  to ...  ’  might  equally  well  be  replaced  by  ‘Could  one  programme  an 
electronic  computer  to...’.  Clearly  the  electronic  computer  so  programmed 
would  itself  constitute  a  machine.  And  on  the  other  hand  if  some  other  machine 


Printed  with  the  permission  of  Financial  Times  Management  and  the  Estate  of  Alan  Turing. 


570  I  Alan  Turing 


had  been  constructed  to  do  the  job  we  could  use  an  electronic  computer  (of 
sufficient  storage  capacity),  suitably  programmed,  to  calculate  what  this  machine 
would  do,  and  in  particular  what  answer  it  would  give. 

After  these  preliminaries  let  us  give  our  minds  to  the  problem  of  making  a 
machine,  or  of  programming  a  computer,  to  play  a  tolerable  game  of  chess. 
In  this  short  discussion  it  is  of  course  out  of  the  question  to  provide  actual 
programmes,  but  this  does  not  really  matter  on  account  of  the  following 
principle: 

If  one  can  explain  quite  unambiguously  in  English,  with  the  aid  of  mathemat¬ 
ical  symbols  if  required,  how  a  calculation  is  to  be  done,  then  it  is  always 
possible  to  programme  any  digital  computer  to  do  that  calculation,  provided 
the  storage  capacity  is  adequate. 

This  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that  admits  of  clear  cut  proof,  but  amongst 
workers  in  the  field  it  is  regarded  as  being  clear  as  day.  Accepting  this  principle, 
our  problem  is  reduced  to  explaining  ‘unambiguously  in  English’  the  rules  by 
which  the  machine  is  to  choose  its  move  in  each  position.  For  definiteness  we 
will  suppose  the  machine  is  playing  white. 

If  the  machine  could  calculate  at  an  infinite  speed,  and  also  had  unlimited 
storage  capacity,  a  comparatively  simple  rule  would  suffice,  and  would  give  a 
result  that  in  a  sense  could  not  be  improved  on.  This  rule  could  be  stated: 

Consider  every  possible  continuation  of  the  game  from  the  given  position. 
There  is  only  a  finite  number  of  them  (at  any  rate  if  the  fifty-move  rule  makes 
a  draw  obligatory,  not  merely  permissive).  Work  back  from  the  end  of  these 
continuations,  marking  a  position  with  white  to  play  as  ‘win’  if  there  is  a  move 
which  turns  it  into  a  position  previously  marked  as  ‘win’.  If  this  does  not 
occur,  but  there  is  a  move  which  leads  to  a  position  marked  ‘draw’,  then  mark 
the  position  ‘draw’.  Failing  this,  mark  it  ‘lose’.  Mark  a  position  with  black  to 
play  by  a  similar  rule  with  ‘win’  and  ‘lose’  interchanged.  If  after  this  process 
has  been  completed  it  is  found  that  there  are  moves  which  lead  to  a  position 
marked  ‘win’,  one  of  these  should  be  chosen.  If  there  is  none  marked  ‘win’ 
choose  one  marked  ‘draw’  if  such  exists.  If  all  moves  lead  to  a  position  marked 
‘lose’,  any  move  may  be  chosen. 

Such  a  rule  is  practically  applicable  in  the  game  of  noughts  and  crosses,  but  in 
chess  is  of  merely  academic  interest. 

Even  when  the  rule  can  be  applied  it  is  not  very  appropriate  for  use  against  a 
weak  opponent,  who  may  make  mistakes  which  ought  to  be  exploited. 

In  spite  of  the  impracticability  of  this  rule  it  bears  some  resemblance  to  what 
one  really  does  when  playing  chess.  One  does  not  follow  all  the  continuations  of 
play,  but  one  follows  some  of  them.  One  does  not  follow  them  until  the  end  of 
the  game,  but  one  follows  them  a  move  or  two,  perhaps  more.  Eventually  a 


Chess  I  571 


position  seems,  rightly  or  wrongly,  too  bad  to  be  worth  further  consideration,  or 
(less  frequently)  too  good  to  hesitate  longer  over.  The  further  a  position  is  from 
the  one  on  the  board  the  less  likely  is  it  to  occur,  and  therefore  the  shorter  is  the 
time  which  can  be  assigned  for  its  consideration.  Following  this  idea  we  might 
have  a  rule  something  like  this: 

Consider  all  continuations  of  the  game  consisting  of  a  move  by  white,  a  reply  by 
black,  and  another  move  and  reply.  The  value  of  the  position  at  the  end  of  each 
of  these  sequences  of  moves  is  estimated  according  to  some  suitable  rule.  The 
values  at  earlier  positions  are  then  calculated  by  working  backwards  move  by 
move  as  in  the  theoretical  rule  given  before.  The  move  to  be  chosen  is  that  which 
leads  to  the  position  with  the  greatest  value. 

It  is  possible  to  arrange  that  no  two  positions  have  the  same  value.  The  rule  is 
then  unambiguous.  A  very  simple  form  of  values,  but  one  not  having  this 
property,  is  an  ‘evaluation  of  material’,  e.g.  on  the  basis 


P=  1 
Kt  =  3 


R  =  5 


Q  =  10 

Checkmate  ±  10001 

If  B  is  black’s  total  and  W  is  white’s,  then  W/B  is  quite  a  good  measure  of 
value.  This  is  better  than  W—B  as  the  latter  does  not  encourage  exchanges  when 
one  has  the  advantage.  Some  small  extra  arbitrary  function  of  position  may  be 
added  to  ensure  definiteness  in  the  result. 

The  weakness  of  this  rule  is  that  it  follows  all  combinations  equally  far.  It 
would  be  much  better  if  the  more  profitable  moves  were  considered  in  greater 
detail  than  the  less.  It  would  also  be  desirable  to  take  into  account  more  than 
mere  ‘value  of  material’. 

After  this  introduction  I  shall  describe  a  particular  set  of  rules,  which  could 
without  difficulty  be  made  into  a  machine  programme.  It  is  understood  that  the 
machine  is  white  and  white  is  next  to  play.  The  current  position  is  called  the 
‘position  of  the  board’,  and  the  positions  arising  from  it  by  later  moves  ‘positions 
in  the  analysis’.2 


1  Editor’s  note.  In  the  Bowden  edition.  Turing’s  ‘  +  ’  has  been  replaced  with  ‘=’. 

2  Editor’s  note.  In  the  Bowden  edition,  Turing’s  ‘position  of  the  board’  has  been  replaced  by  ‘position  on 
the  board’. 


572  I  Alan  Turing 

‘Considerable’  Moves,  i.e.  Moves  to  be  considered  in  the  analysis 
by  the  machine 

Every  possibility  for  white’s  next  move  and  for  black’s  reply  is  ‘considerable’.  If  a 
capture  is  considerable  then  any  recapture  is  considerable.  The  capture  of  an 
undefended  piece  or  the  capture  of  a  piece  of  higher  value  by  one  of  lower  value 
is  always  considerable.  A  move  giving  checkmate  is  considerable. 

Dead  position 

A  position  in  the  analysis  is  dead  if  there  are  no  considerable  moves  in  that 
position,  i.e.  if  it  is  more  than  two  moves  ahead  of  the  present  position,  and  no 
capture  or  recapture  or  mate  can  be  made  in  the  next  move. 

Value  of  position 

The  value  of  a  dead  position  is  obtained  by  adding  up  the  piece  values  as  above,  and 
forming  the  ratio  W/B  of  white’s  total  to  black’s.  In  other  positions  with  white  to 
play  the  value  is  the  greatest  value  of:  (a)  the  positions  obtained  by  considerable 
moves,  or  ( b)  the  position  itself  evaluated  as  if  a  dead  position,  the  latter  alternative 
to  be  omitted  if  all  moves  are  considerable.  The  same  process  is  to  be  undertaken 
for  one  of  black’s  moves,  but  the  machine  will  then  choose  the  least  value. 

Position-play  value 

Each  white  piece  has  a  certain  position-play  contribution  and  so  has  the  black 
king.  These  must  all  be  added  up  to  give  the  position-play  value. 

For  a  Q,  R,  B  or  Kt,  count 

i)  The  square  root  of  the  number  of  moves  the  piece  can  make  from  the 
position,  counting  a  capture  as  two  moves,  and  not  forgetting  that  the 
king  must  not  be  left  in  check. 

ii)  (If  not  a  Q)  1  •  0  if  it  is  defended,  and  an  additional  0-5  if  twice  defended. 
For  a  K,  count 

iii)  For  moves  other  than  castling  as  i)  above. 

iv)  It  is  then  necessary  to  make  some  allowance  for  the  vulnerability  of  the 
K.  This  can  be  done  by  assuming  it  to  be  replaced  by  a  friendly  Q  on  the 
same  square,  estimating  as  in  i),  but  subtracting  instead  of  adding. 

v)  Count  1  -0  for  the  possibility  of  castling  later  not  being  lost  by  moves  of  K 
or  rooks,  a  further  1-0  if  castling  could  take  place  on  the  next  move,  and 
yet  another  10  for  the  actual  performance  of  castling. 

For  a  P,  count 

vi)  0-2  for  each  rank  advanced. 

vii)  0-3  for  being  defended  by  at  least  one  piece  (not  P). 

For  the  black  K,  count 


Chess  I  573 


viii)  10  for  the  threat  of  checkmate, 
ix)  0-5  for  check. 

We  can  now  state  the  rule  for  play  as  follows. 

The  move  chosen  must  have  the  greatest  possible  value,  and,  consistent  with 
this,  the  greatest  possible  position-play  value.  If  this  condition  admits  of 
several  solutions  a  choice  may  be  made  at  random,  or  according  to  an 
arbitrary  additional  condition. 

Note  that  no  ‘analysis’  is  involved  in  position-play  evaluation.  This  is  in  order 
to  reduce  the  amount  of  work  done  on  deciding  the  move. 

The  game  below  was  played  between  this  machine  and  a  weak  player  who  did 
not  know  the  system.  To  simplify  the  calculations  the  square  roots  were  rounded 
off  to  one  decimal  place  (i.e.  the  table  below  was  used).  No  ‘random  choices’ 
actually  arose  in  this  game.  The  increase  of  position-play  value  is  given  after 
white’s  move  if  relevant.  An  asterisk  indicates  that  every  other  move  had  a  lower 
position-play  value.  0 — 0  indicates  castling.3 

Number  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13 

Square  Root  0  1  1-4  1-7  2-0  2-2  2-4  2-6  2-8  3-0  3-2  3-3  3-5  3-6 


White  (Machine)  Black 


1.  P— k4 

4-2* 

P— k4 

2.  Kt— QB3 

3-1* 

Kt— KB3 

3.  P— Q4 

3-1* 

B— QKt5 

4.  Kt— KB3(1) 

2-0 

P— q3 

5.  B— Q, 

3-6* 

Kt— QB3 

6.  P— Q5 

0-2 

Kt— Q5 

7.  P— KR4<2) 

1-1* 

B— Kts 

0° 


o 

£3 

1-0* 

Kt  x  Kt  ch. 

9.  P  x  Kt 

B — KR4 

10.  B — Kt5  ch. 

2-4* 

p— qb3 

11.  P  x  P 

0—0 

12.  P  x  P 

R— Kt! 

13.  B— R6 

-1-5 

Q— R4 

14.  Q— K2 

0-6 

Kt— Q2 

15.  KR— Kt!(3) 

1-2* 

Kt— B4(4) 

16.  R — Kt5<5) 

B — Kt3 

17.  B — Kt5 

0-4 

Kt  x  KtP 

18.  0—0 

3-0* 

Kt— B4 

19.  B— B6 

KR— QB! 

Continued 


3  Editor’s  note.  In  the  Bowden  edition  a  different  game  is  to  shown,  diverging  from  the  present  game  at 
the  21st  move. 


574  I  Alan  Turing 


White  ( Machine )  Black 


20. 

B— Q5 

B  x  Kt 

21. 

P  x  B(2)  -0-7 

Q  x  P 

22. 

B — K3(6) 

Q— R6  ch. 

23. 

K— Q2 

Kt— R5 

24. 

B  x  RP(7) 

R— Kty 

25. 

P— b4 

Q— B6  ch. 

26. 

K— B1 

R— R7 

27. 

B  x  BP  ch. 

B  x  B 

28. 

R  x  KtP  ch.(5) 

K  x  R 

29. 

B— k3(8) 

R — R8  mate 

Notes: 

1.  If  B — Q2  3-6 *  then  P  x  P  is  foreseen. 

2.  Most  inappropriate  moves  from  a  positional  point  of 
view. 

3.  If  0—0  then  B  x  Kt,  B  x  B,  Q  x  P. 

4.  The  fork  is  unforeseen. 

5.  Heads  in  the  sand! 

6.  Only  this  or  B — K!  can  prevent  Q — R8  mate. 

7.  Fiddling  while  Rome  burns. 

8.  Mate  is  foreseen,  but  ‘business  as  usual’. 


Numerous  criticisms  of  the  machine’s  play  may  be  made.  It  is  quite  defenceless 
against  ‘forks’,  although  it  may  be  able  to  see  certain  other  kinds  of  combination. 
It  is  of  course  not  difficult  to  devise  improvements  of  the  programme  [so]  that 
these  simple  forks  are  foreseen.  The  reader  may  be  able  to  think  of  some  such 
improvements  for  himself.  Since  no  claim  is  made  that  the  above  rule  is  particu¬ 
larly  good,  I  have  been  content  to  leave  this  flaw  without  remedy;  clearly  a  line 
has  to  be  drawn  between  the  flaws  which  one  will  attempt  to  eliminate  and  those 
which  must  be  accepted  as  a  risk.  Another  criticism  is  that  the  scheme  proposed, 
although  reasonable  in  the  middle  game,  is  futile  in  the  end  game.  The  change¬ 
over  from  the  middle  game  to  the  end-game  is  usually  sufficiently  clean  cut  for  it 
to  be  possible  to  have  an  entirely  different  system  for  the  end-game.  This  should 
of  course  include  quite  definite  programmes  for  the  standard  situations,  such  as 
mate  with  rook  and  king,  or  king  and  pawn  against  king.  There  is  no  intention  to 
discuss  the  end-game  further  here. 

If  I  were  to  sum  up  the  weakness  of  the  above  system  in  a  few  words  I  would 
describe  it  as  a  caricature  of  my  own  play.  It  was  in  fact  based  on  an  introspective 
analysis  of  my  thought  processes  when  playing,  with  considerable  simplifica¬ 
tions.  It  makes  oversights  which  are  very  similar  to  those  which  I  make  myself, 
and  which  may  in  both  cases  be  ascribed  to  the  considerable  moves  being  rather 
inappropriately  chosen.  This  fact  might  be  regarded  as  supporting  the  rather  glib 
view  which  is  often  expressed,  to  the  effect  that  ‘one  cannot  programme  a 
machine  to  play  a  better  game  than  one  plays  oneself’.  This  statement  should  I 


Chess  I  575 


think  be  compared  with  another  of  rather  similar  form.  ‘No  animal  can  swallow 
an  animal  heavier  than  himself.’  Both  statements  are,  so  far  as  I  know,  untrue. 
They  are  also  both  of  a  kind  that  one  is  rather  easily  bluffed  into  accepting,  partly 
because  one  thinks  that  there  ought  to  be  some  rather  slick  way  of  demonstrating 
them,  and  one  does  not  like  to  admit  that  one  does  not  see  what  this  argument  is. 
They  are  also  both  supported  by  normal  experience,  and  need  rather  exceptional 
cases  to  falsify  them.  The  statement  about  chess  programming  may  be  falsified 
quite  simply  by  the  speed  of  the  machine,  which  might  make  it  feasible  to  carry 
the  analysis  a  move  farther  than  a  man  could  do  in  the  same  time.  This  effect  is 
rather  less  than  might  be  supposed.  Although  electronic  computers  are  very  fast 
where  conventional  computing  is  concerned,  their  advantage  is  much  reduced 
where  enumeration  of  cases,  etc.,  is  involved  on  a  large  scale.  Take  for  instance 
the  problem  of  counting  the  possible  moves  from  a  given  position  in  chess.  If  the 
number  is  30  a  man  might  do  it  in  45  seconds  and  the  machine  in  1  second.  The 
machine  has  still  an  advantage,  but  it  is  much  less  overwhelming  than  it  would 
be  for  instance  where  calculating  cosines. 

In  connection  with  the  question,  numbered  iv)  above,  as  to  the  ability  of  a 
chess-machine  to  profit  from  experience,  one  can  see  that  it  would  be  quite 
possible  to  programme  the  machine  to  try  out  variations  in  its  method  of  play 
(e.g.  variations  in  piece  value)  and  adopt  the  one  giving  the  most  satisfactory 
results.  This  could  certainly  be  described  as  ‘learning’,  though  it  is  not  quite 
representative  of  learning  as  we  know  it.  It  might  also  be  possible  to  programme 
the  machine  to  search  for  new  types  of  combination  in  chess.  If  this  product 
produced  results  which  were  quite  new,  and  also  interesting  to  the  programmer, 
who  should  have  the  credit?  Compare  this  with  the  situation  where  the  Defence 
Minister  has  given  orders  for  research  to  be  done  to  find  a  counter  to  the  bow 
and  arrow.  Should  the  inventor  of  the  shield  have  the  credit,  or  should  the 
Defence  Minister?