

Can  Digital  Computers  Think?  (7957) 

Alan  Turing 


Introduction 

Jack  Copeland 

The  lecture  ‘Can  Digital  Computers  Think?’  was  broadcast  on  BBC  Radio  on  15 
May  1951,  and  was  repeated  on  3  July  of  that  year.1  (Sara  Turing  relates  that 
Turing  did  not  listen  to  the  first  broadcast  but  did  ‘pluck  up  courage’  to  listen  to 
the  repeat.2)  Turing’s  was  the  second  lecture  in  a  series  with  the  general  title 
‘Automatic  Calculating  Machines’.  Other  speakers  in  the  series  included 
Newman,  D.  R.  Hartree,  M.  V.  Wilkes,  and  F.  C.  Williams.3 

Imitating  the  Brain 

Turing’s  principal  aim  in  this  lecture  is  to  defend  his  view  that  ‘it  is  not  altogether 
unreasonable  to  describe  digital  computers  as  brains’,  and  he  argues  for  the 
proposition  that  ‘If  any  machine  can  appropriately  be  described  as  a  brain, 
then  any  digital  computer  can  be  so  described’. 

The  lecture  casts  light  upon  Turing’s  attitude  towards  talk  of  machines  think¬ 
ing.  In  Chapter  11  he  says  that  in  his  view  the  question  ‘Can  machines  think?’  is 
‘too  meaningless  to  deserve  discussion’  (p.  449).  However,  in  the  present  chapter 
he  makes  liberal  use  of  such  phrases  as  ‘programm[ing]  a  machine. .  .to  think’ 
and  ‘the  attempt  to  make  a  thinking  machine’.  In  one  passage,  Turing  says 
(p.  485):  ‘our  main  problem  [is]  how  to  programme  a  machine  to  imitate  a 
brain,  or  as  we  might  say  more  briefly,  if  less  accurately,  to  think.’  He  shows  the 
same  willingness  to  discuss  the  question  ‘Can  machines  think?’  in  Chapter  14. 

Turing’s  view  is  that  a  machine  which  imitates  the  intellectual  behaviour  of  a 
human  brain  can  itself  appropriately  be  described  as  a  brain  or  as  thinking.  In 


1  Alan  M.  Turing  (Cambridge:  Heffer,  1959),  102. 

2  Ibid. 

3  Letter  from  Maurice  Wilkes  to  Copeland  (9  July  1997). 


Can  Digital  Computers  Think?  I  477 


Chapter  14,  Turing  emphasizes  that  it  is  only  the  intellectual  behaviour  of  the 
brain  that  need  be  considered  (pp.  494-5):  ‘To  take  an  extreme  case,  we  are  not 
interested  in  the  fact  that  the  brain  has  the  consistency  of  cold  porridge.  We  don’t 
want  to  say  “This  machine’s  quite  hard,  so  it  isn’t  a  brain,  and  so  it  can’t  think.”  ’ 
It  is,  of  course,  the  ability  of  the  machine  to  imitate  the  intellectual  behaviour 
of  a  human  brain  that  is  examined  in  the  Turing  test  (Chapter  11).  Thus:  any 
machine  that  plays  the  imitation  game  successfully  can  appropriately  be  de¬ 
scribed  as  a  brain  or  as  thinking. 


Freedom  of  the  Will 

This  chapter  contains  one  of  the  two  discussions  of  free  will  occurring  in  Turing’s 
mature  writings,  both  of  which  are  tantalizingly  brief.  (The  early  essay  entitled 
‘Nature  of  Spirit,  which  possibly  dates  from  Turing’s  undergraduate  days,  also 
contains  a  discussion  of  free  will.  There  Turing  wrote:  ‘the  theory  which  held  that 
as  eclipses  etc.  are  predestined  so  were  all  our  actions  breaks  down  . . .  We  have  a 
will  which  is  able  to  determine  the  action  of  the  atoms  probably  in  a  small 
portion  of  the  brain,  or  possibly  all  over  it.’4)  The  other  discussion  occurs  in 
Chapter  11,  where  Turing  says  (p.  445): 

An  interesting  variant  on  the  idea  of  a  digital  computer  is  a  ‘digital  computer  with  a 
random  element’.  These  have  instructions  involving  the  throwing  of  a  die  or  some 
equivalent  electronic  process . . .  Sometimes  such  a  machine  is  described  as  having  free 
will  (though  I  would  not  use  this  phrase  myself).  It  is  not  normally  possible  to  determine 
from  observing  a  machine  whether  it  has  a  random  element,  for  a  similar  effect  can  be 
produced  by  such  devices  as  making  the  choices  depend  on  the  digits  of  the  decimal  for  n. 

Unfortunately,  Turing  does  not  expand  on  the  remark  ‘I  would  not  use  this 
phrase  myself.’  Possibly  he  means  simply  that  the  addition  of  a  random  element 
to  a  computer  is  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  warrant  the  attribution  of  free  will. 
Presumably  one  would  at  least  need  to  add  cognition  and  initiative  as  well  before 
the  machine  could  reasonably  be  described  as  having  free  will  (compare  Chapter 
10,  pp.  424,  429-30).  Alternatively,  it  is  possible  that  Turing  is  objecting  to  the 
term  ‘free  will’  itself,  much  as  he  objects  elsewhere  in  Chapter  11  to  the  word 
‘think’  (‘too  meaningless  to  deserve  discussion’). 

Turing  introduced  this  idea  of  a  ‘digital  computer  with  a  random  element’ 
more  fully  in  Chapter  10  (p.  416): 

It  is  possible  to  modify  the  above  described  types  of  discrete  machines  by  allowing  several 
alternative  operations  to  be  applied  at  some  points,  the  alternatives  to  be  chosen  by  a 
random  process.  Such  a  machine  will  be  described  as  ‘partially  random’.  If  we  wish  to  say 


4  A  copy  of  ‘Nature  of  Spirit’  is  among  the  Turing  Papers  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College, 
Cambridge. 


478  I  Jack  Copeland 


definitely  that  a  machine  is  not  of  this  kind  we  will  describe  it  as  ‘determined’.  Sometimes  a 
machine  may  be  strictly  speaking  determined  but  appear  superficially  as  if  it  were  partially 
random.  This  would  occur  if  for  instance  the  digits  of  the  number  n  were  used  to  determine 
the  choices  of  a  partially  random  machine  where  previously  a  dice  thrower  or  electronic 
equivalent  had  been  used.  These  machines  are  known  as  apparently  partially  random. 

Turing  discusses  partially  random  machines  further  in  Chapter  12  and  in 
Chapter  9,  where  he  mentions  the  possibility  of  including  in  the  ACE  a  ‘random 
element,  some  electronic  roulette  wheel’  (p.  391). 

In  ‘Can  Digital  Computers  Think?’  Turing  raises  both  the  possibility  that  ‘the 
feeling  of  free  will  which  we  all  have  is  an  illusion’  and  the  possibility  that  ‘we 
really  have  got  free  will  but  yet  there  is  no  way  of  telling  from  our  behaviour  that 
this  is  so’.  In  parallel,  he  raises  the  question  whether  the  behaviour  of  the  brain  ‘is 
in  principle  predictable  by  calculation’  (i.e.  by  Turing  machine).  In  discussing 
this  possibility,  he  observes  that  we  ‘certainly  do  not  know  how  any  such 
calculation  should  be  done’.  He  points  out  that,  furthermore,  some  physicists 
argue  that  no  such  prediction  is  even  theoretically  possible,  ‘on  account  of  the 
indeterminacy  principle  in  quantum  mechanics’.  Turing  does  not  state  his  own 
position  on  these  issues  in  the  course  of  the  lecture.  However,  in  an  interview 
given  long  after  Turing’s  death,  Max  Newman  stated  that  Turing  ‘had  a  deep- 
seated  conviction  that  the  real  brain  has  a  “roulette  wheel”  somewhere  in  it.’5 
This  seems  to  indicate  that  Turing’s  view  was  that  the  brain  is  a  partially  random 
machine.  Whether  or  not  Turing  would  have  asserted,  on  that  basis,  that  we 
‘really  have  got  free  will’  is  not  known. 


Can  Computers  Think? 

Turing’s  overarching  aim  in  the  lecture  is  to  answer  the  question  posed  by  his 
title.  His  strategy  is  to  argue  for  the  proposition  mentioned  above: 

If  any  machine  can  appropriately  be  described  as  a  brain,  then  any  digital 
computer  can  be  so  described. 

His  initial  bald  statement  of  his  argument  is  (p.  483): 

If  now  some  particular  machine  can  be  described  as  a  brain  we  have  only  to  programme 
our  digital  computer  to  imitate  it  and  it  will  also  be  a  brain.  If  it  is  accepted  that  real 
brains,  as  found  in  animals,  and  in  particular  in  men,  are  a  sort  of  machine  it  will  follow 
that  our  digital  computer  suitably  programmed,  will  behave  like  a  brain. 

Turing  goes  on  to  flesh  out  his  argument  in  various  ways,  turning  eventually  to 
the  problem  of  free  will  (p.  484):  ‘There  are  still  some  difficulties.  To  behave  like  a 


5  Newman  in  interview  with  Christopher  Evans  (‘The  Pioneers  of  Computing:  An  Oral  History  of 
Computing’  (London:  Science  Museum)). 


Can  Digital  Computers  Think?  I  479 


brain  seems  to  involve  free  will,  but  the  behaviour  of  a  digital  computer,  when  it 
has  been  programmed,  is  completely  determined.’  Turing  argues  resourcefully 
that,  even  if  it  is  true  that  brains  have  free  will,  this  in  fact  presents  no  difficulty 
for  his  claim  that  a  suitably  programmed  computer  can  imitate  the  brain 
(pp.  484-5): 

a  machine  which  is  to  imitate  a  brain  must  appear  to  behave  as  if  it  had  free  will,  and  it 
may  well  be  asked  how  this  is  to  be  achieved.  One  possibility  is  to  make  its  behaviour 
depend  on  something  like  a  roulette  wheel  or  a  supply  of  radium.  ...  It  is,  however,  not 
really  even  necessary  to  do  this.  It  is  not  difficult  to  design  machines  whose  behaviour 
appears  quite  random  to  anyone  who  does  not  know  the  details  of  their  construction. 

Such  machines  are  ‘apparently  partially  random’  (p.  416).  Examples  of  appar¬ 
ently  partially  random  machines  are  the  German  Enigma  machine  and  the 
Lorenz  SZ  40  cipher  machine  (‘Tunny’).  Since  both  these  machines  can  be 
simulated  by  a  digital  computer,  an  appropriately  programmed  digital  computer 
is  apparently  partially  random.  (In  Chapter  1 1  Turing  mentions  having  written  a 
programme  for  the  Manchester  computer  that  produced  apparently  partially 
random  behaviour.  When  given  a  number,  the  programme  would  reply  with 
a  number.  Turing  said  ‘I  would  defy  anyone  to  learn  from  these  replies  sufficient 
about  the  programme  to  be  able  to  predict  any  replies  to  untried  values’ 
(p.  457).) 

Apparently  partially  random  machines  imitate  partially  random  machines.  If 
the  brain  is  a  partially  random  machine,  an  appropriately  programmed  digital 
computer  may  nevertheless  give  a  convincing  imitation  of  a  brain.  The  appear¬ 
ance  that  this  deterministic  machine  gives  of  possessing  free  will  may  be  said 
to  be  mere  sham,  but  this  will  not  affect  the  machine’s  ability  to  play  the 
imitation  game  successfully.  And  by  Turing’s  principle,  above,  any  machine  that 
plays  the  imitation  game  successfully  can  appropriately  be  described  as  a  brain. 


The  Church-Turing  Thesis  and  Calculating  Machines 

In  ‘Can  Digital  Computers  Think?’  Turing  puts  foward  a  thesis  that,  while  not 
the  same  as  the  Church-Turing  thesis  (see  Chapter  1  and  ‘Computable  Numbers: 
A  Guide’),  is  in  effect  the  result  of  replacing  the  term  ‘human  computer’  in  the 
Church-Turing  thesis  by  ‘calculating  machine’,  and  replacing  ‘universal  Turing 
machine’  by  ‘digital  computer  of  sufficient  speed  and  storage  capacity’. 

The  Church-Turing  thesis  states  that  any  work  that  can  be  carried  out  by  a 
human  computer  (i.e.  by  an  obedient  clerk  working  with  pencil  on  paper  in 
accordance  with  an  effective  procedure)  can  equally  well  be  carried  out  by  the 
universal  Turing  machine.  The  present  thesis  (pp.  482-3)  states  that  any  work 
that  can  be  carried  out  by  any  calculating  machine  can  equally  well  be  carried  out 
by  a  digital  computer  of  sufficient  speed  and  storage  capacity: 


480  I  Jack  Copeland 


A  digital  computer  is  a  universal  machine  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be  made  to  replace  any 
machine  of  a  certain  very  wide  class.  It  will  not  replace  a  bulldozer  or  a  steam-engine  or  a 
telescope,  but  it  will  replace  any  rival  design  of  calculating  machine. 

Newman  wrote  in  the  same  vein  a  few  years  previously: 

A  universal  machine  is  a  single  machine  which,  when  provided  with  suitable  instructions, 
will  perform  any  calculation  that  could  be  done  by  a  specially  constructed  machine.  No 
real  machine  can  be  truly  universal  because  its  size  is  limited . . .  but  subject  to  this 
limitation  of  size,  the  machines  now  being  made  in  America  and  in  this  country  will  be 
‘universal’ — if  they  work  at  all;  that  is,  they  will  do  every  kind  of  job  that  can  be  done  by 
special  machines.6 

If  Turing  were  requested  to  clarify  the  notion  of  a  ‘calculating  machine’,  he 
would  perhaps  offer  paradigm  examples  such  as  the  Brunsviga  (a  popular  desk 
calculating  machine),  a  differential  analyser  (an  analogue  computing  device), 
special-purpose  electronic  machines  like  Colossus  and  ENIAC,  and  so  on  (com¬ 
pare  Chapter  10,  pp.  412-13).  Or  perhaps  he  would  say,  with  greater  generality, 
that  a  calculating  machine  is  any  machine  that  duplicates  the  abilities  of  a  human 
mathematician  working  mechanically  with  paper  and  pencil,  i.e.  in  accordance 
with  an  effective  (‘rule  of  thumb’)  procedure.  It  was  in  this  manner  that  he 
explained  the  idea  of  an  electronic  computing  machine  in  the  opening  paragraph 
of  his  Programmers’  Handbook:  ‘Electronic  computers  are  intended  to  carry  out 
any  definite  rule  of  thumb  process  which  could  have  been  done  by  a  human 
operator  working  in  a  disciplined  but  unintelligent  manner.’7 

Turing’s  remarks  in  Chapter  17  on  the  status  of  the  Church-Turing  thesis  are 
also  relevant  here  (and  see  also  the  section  ‘Normal  Forms  and  the  Church- 
Turing  Thesis’  in  the  introduction  to  Chapter  17). 


Other  Notable  Features 

Other  features  of  note  in  the  lecture  include  the  continuation  of  the  discussion  of 
‘Lady  Lovelace’s  dictum’,  begun  in  Chapter  11,  and  Turing’s  glorious  analogy 
comparing  trying  to  programme  a  computer  to  behave  like  a  brain  with  trying  to 
write  a  treatise  about  family  life  on  Mars — and  moreover  with  insufficient  paper. 
(Newman  once  remarked  on  the  ‘comical  but  brilliantly  apt  analogies  with  which 
he  [Turing]  explained  his  ideas’.8) 


6  M.  H.  A.  Newman,  ‘General  Principles  of  the  Design  of  All-Purpose  Computing  Machines’,  Proceedings 
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  Series  A,  195  (1948),  271-4  (271-2). 

7  A.  M.  Turing,  Programmers’  Handbook  for  Manchester  Electronic  Computer,  University  of  Manchester 
Computing  Laboratory  (1950),  1.  A  digital  facsimile  of  the  Programmers’  Handbook  is  available  in  The 
Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/  programmers_handbook>. 

8  Newman  writing  in  the  Manchester  Guardian,  11  June  1954. 


Can  Digital  Computers  Think?  I  481 


Further  reading 

Copeland,  B.  J.,  Artificial  Intelligence:  A  Philosophical  Introduction  (Oxford:  Blackwell, 
1993).  Chapter  3:  ‘Can  a  Machine  Think?’;  chapter  7:  ‘Freedom’. 

- ‘Narrow  versus  Wide  Mechanism:  Including  a  Re-examination  of  Turing’s  Views  on 

the  Mind-Machine  Issue’,  Journal  of  Philosophy,  97  (2000),  5-32.  Reprinted  in 
M.  Scheutz,  Computationalism:  New  Directions  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  2002). 
Dennett,  D.  C.,  Elbow  Room:  The  Varieties  of  Freewill  Worth  Wanting  (Oxford:  Clarendon 
Press,  1984). 

Simons,  G.,  The  Biology  of  Computer  Life  (Brighton:  Harvester,  1985). 


Provenance 

The  text  that  follows  is  from  Turing’s  typescript  and  incorporates  corrections 
made  in  his  hand.9 


9  The  typescript  is  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  B  5). 
The  present  edition  first  appeared  in  B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.),  ‘A  Lecture  and  Two  Radio  Broadcasts  on  Machine 
Intelligence  by  Alan  Turing’,  in  K.  Furukawa,  D.  Michie  and  S.  Muggleton  (eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  15 
(Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1999). 


Can  Digital  Computers  Think? 

Digital  computers  have  often  been  described  as  mechanical  brains.  Most  scien¬ 
tists  probably  regard  this  description  as  a  mere  newspaper  stunt,  but  some  do 
not.  One  mathematician  has  expressed  the  opposite  point  of  view  to  me  rather 
forcefully  in  the  words  ‘It  is  commonly  said  that  these  machines  are  not  brains, 
but  you  and  I  know  that  they  are.’  In  this  talk  I  shall  try  to  explain  the  ideas 
behind  the  various  possible  points  of  view,  though  not  altogether  impartially. 
I  shall  give  most  attention  to  the  view  which  I  hold  myself,  that  it  is  not 
altogether  unreasonable  to  describe  digital  computers  as  brains.  A  different 
point  of  view  has  already  been  put  by  Professor  Hartree. 

First  we  may  consider  the  naive  point  of  view  of  the  man  in  the  street.  He 
hears  amazing  accounts  of  what  these  machines  can  do:  most  of  them  apparently 
involve  intellectual  feats  of  which  he  would  be  quite  incapable.  He  can  only 
explain  it  by  supposing  that  the  machine  is  a  sort  of  brain,  though  he  may  prefer 
simply  to  disbelieve  what  he  has  heard. 

The  majority  of  scientists  are  contemptuous  of  this  almost  superstitious  atti¬ 
tude.  They  know  something  of  the  principles  on  which  the  machines  are  con¬ 
structed  and  of  the  way  in  which  they  are  used.  Their  outlook  was  well  summed  up 
by  Lady  Lovelace  over  a  hundred  years  ago,  speaking  of  Babbage’s  Analytical 
Engine.  She  said,  as  Hartree  has  already  quoted,  ‘The  Analytical  Engine  has  no 
pretensions  whatever  to  originate  anything.  It  can  do  whatever  we  know  how  to 
order  it  to  perform.’  This  very  well  describes  the  way  in  which  digital  computers  are 
actually  used  at  the  present  time,  and  in  which  they  will  probably  mainly  be  used 
for  many  years  to  come.  For  any  one  calculation  the  whole  procedure  that  the 
machine  is  to  go  through  is  planned  out  in  advance  by  a  mathematician.  The  less 
doubt  there  is  about  what  is  going  to  happen  the  better  the  mathematician  is 
pleased.  It  is  like  planning  a  military  operation.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  fair 
to  say  that  the  machine  doesn’t  originate  anything. 

There  is  however  a  third  point  of  view,  which  I  hold  myself.  I  agree  with  Lady 
Lovelace’s  dictum  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  I  believe  that  its  validity  depends  on 
considering  how  digital  computers  are  used  rather  than  how  they  could  he  used. 
In  fact  I  believe  that  they  could  be  used  in  such  a  manner  that  they  could 
appropriately  be  described  as  brains.  I  should  also  say  that  ‘If  any  machine  can 
appropriately  be  described  as  a  brain,  then  any  digital  computer  can  be  so 
described.’ 

This  last  statement  needs  some  explanation.  It  may  appear  rather  startling,  but 
with  some  reservations  it  appears  to  be  an  inescapable  fact.  It  can  be  shown  to 
follow  from  a  characteristic  property  of  digital  computers,  which  I  will  call  their 
universality.  A  digital  computer  is  a  universal  machine  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be 


Printed  with  the  permission  of  the  BBC  and  the  Estate  of  Alan  Turing. 


Can  Digital  Computers  Think?  I  483 


made  to  replace  any  machine  of  a  certain  very  wide  class.  It  will  not  replace  a 
bulldozer  or  a  steam-engine  or  a  telescope,  but  it  will  replace  any  rival  design  of 
calculating  machine,  that  is  to  say  any  machine  into  which  one  can  feed  data  and 
which  will  later  print  out  results.  In  order  to  arrange  for  our  computer  to  imitate 
a  given  machine  it  is  only  necessary  to  programme  the  computer  to  calculate 
what  the  machine  in  question  would  do  under  given  circumstances,  and  in 
particular  what  answers  it  would  print  out.  The  computer  can  then  be  made  to 
print  out  the  same  answers. 

If  now  some  particular  machine  can  be  described  as  a  brain  we  have  only  to 
programme  our  digital  computer  to  imitate  it  and  it  will  also  be  a  brain.  If  it  is 
accepted  that  real  brains,  as  found  in  animals,  and  in  particular  in  men,  are  a  sort 
of  machine  it  will  follow  that  our  digital  computer,  suitably  programmed,  will 
behave  like  a  brain. 

This  argument  involves  several  assumptions  which  can  quite  reasonably  be 
challenged.  I  have  already  explained  that  the  machine  to  be  imitated  must  be 
more  like  a  calculator  than  a  bulldozer.  This  is  merely  a  reflection  of  the  fact  that 
we  are  speaking  of  mechanical  analogues  of  brains,  rather  than  of  feet  or  jaws.  It 
was  also  necessary  that  this  machine  should  be  of  the  sort  whose  behaviour  is  in 
principle  predictable  by  calculation.  We  certainly  do  not  know  how  any  such 
calculation  should  be  done,  and  it  was  even  argued  by  Sir  Arthur  Eddington  that 
on  account  of  the  indeterminacy  principle  in  quantum  mechanics  no  such 
prediction  is  even  theoretically  possible. 

Another  assumption  was  that  the  storage  capacity  of  the  computer  used 
should  be  sufficient  to  carry  out  the  prediction  of  the  behaviour  of  the  machine 
to  be  imitated.  It  should  also  have  sufficient  speed.  Our  present  computers 
probably  have  not  got  the  necessary  storage  capacity,  though  they  may  well 
have  the  speed.  This  means  in  effect  that  if  we  wish  to  imitate  anything  so 
complicated  as  the  human  brain  we  need  a  very  much  larger  machine  than  any 
of  the  computers  at  present  available.  We  probably  need  something  at  least  a 
hundred  times  as  large  as  the  Manchester  Computer.  Alternatively  of  course  a 
machine  of  equal  size  or  smaller  would  do  if  sufficient  progress  were  made  in  the 
technique  of  storing  information. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  there  is  no  need  for  there  to  be  any  increase  in  the 
complexity  of  the  computers  used.  If  we  try  to  imitate  ever  more  complicated 
machines  or  brains  we  must  use  larger  and  larger  computers  to  do  it.  We  do  not 
need  to  use  successively  more  complicated  ones.  This  may  appear  paradoxical, 
but  the  explanation  is  not  difficult.  The  imitation  of  a  machine  by  a  computer 
requires  not  only  that  we  should  have  made  the  computer,  but  that  we  should 
have  programmed  it  appropriately.  The  more  complicated  the  machine  to  be 
imitated  the  more  complicated  must  the  programme  be. 

This  may  perhaps  be  made  clearer  by  an  analogy.  Suppose  two  men  both 
wanted  to  write  their  autobiographies,  and  that  one  had  had  an  eventful  life,  but 


484  I  Alan  Turing 


very  little  had  happened  to  the  other.  There  would  be  two  difficulties  troubling 
the  man  with  the  more  eventful  life  more  seriously  than  the  other.  He  would  have 
to  spend  more  on  paper  and  he  would  have  to  take  more  trouble  over  thinking 
what  to  say.  The  supply  of  paper  would  not  be  likely  to  be  a  serious  difficulty, 
unless  for  instance  he  were  on  a  desert  island,  and  in  any  case  it  could  only  be  a 
technical  or  a  financial  problem.  The  other  difficulty  would  be  more  fundamen¬ 
tal  and  would  become  more  serious  still  if  he  were  not  writing  his  life  but  a  work 
on  something  he  knew  nothing  about,  let  us  say  about  family  life  on  Mars.  Our 
problem  of  programming  a  computer  to  behave  like  a  brain  is  something  like 
trying  to  write  this  treatise  on  a  desert  island.  We  cannot  get  the  storage  capacity 
we  need:  in  other  words  we  cannot  get  enough  paper  to  write  the  treatise  on,  and 
in  any  case  we  don’t  know  what  we  should  write  down  if  we  had  it.  This  is  a  poor 
state  of  affairs,  but,  to  continue  the  analogy,  it  is  something  to  know  how  to 
write,  and  to  appreciate  the  fact  that  most  knowledge  can  be  embodied  in  books. 

In  view  of  this  it  seems  that  the  wisest  ground  on  which  to  criticise  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  digital  computers  as  ‘mechanical  brains’  or  ‘electronic  brains’  is  that, 
although  they  might  be  programmed  to  behave  like  brains,  we  do  not  at  present 
know  how  this  should  be  done.  With  this  outlook  I  am  in  full  agreement.  It  leaves 
open  the  question  as  to  whether  we  will  or  will  not  eventually  succeed  in  finding 
such  a  programme.  I,  personally,  am  inclined  to  believe  that  such  a  programme 
will  be  found.  I  think  it  is  probable  for  instance  that  at  the  end  of  the  century  it  will 
be  possible  to  programme  a  machine  to  answer  questions  in  such  a  way  that  it  will 
be  extremely  difficult  to  guess  whether  the  answers  are  being  given  by  a  man  or  by 
the  machine.  I  am  imagining  something  like  a  viva-voce  examination,  but  with  the 
questions  and  answers  all  typewritten  in  order  that  we  need  not  consider  such 
irrelevant  matters  as  the  faithfulness  with  which  the  human  voice  can  be  imitated. 
This  only  represents  my  opinion;  there  is  plenty  of  room  for  others. 

There  are  still  some  difficulties.  To  behave  like  a  brain  seems  to  involve  free 
will,  but  the  behaviour  of  a  digital  computer,  when  it  has  been  programmed,  is 
completely  determined.  These  two  facts  must  somehow  be  reconciled,  but  to  do 
so  seems  to  involve  us  in  an  age-old  controversy,  that  of  ‘free  will  and  determin¬ 
ism’.  There  are  two  ways  out.  It  may  be  that  the  feeling  of  free  will  which  we  all 
have  is  an  illusion.  Or  it  may  be  that  we  really  have  got  free  will,  but  yet  there  is 
no  way  of  telling  from  our  behaviour  that  this  is  so.  In  the  latter  case,  however 
well  a  machine  imitates  a  man’s  behaviour  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  sham.  I 
do  not  know  how  we  can  ever  decide  between  these  alternatives  but  whichever  is 
the  correct  one  it  is  certain  that  a  machine  which  is  to  imitate  a  brain  must 
appear  to  behave  as  if  it  had  free  will,  and  it  may  well  be  asked  how  this  is  to  be 
achieved.  One  possibility  is  to  make  its  behaviour  depend  on  something  like  a 
roulette  wheel  or  a  supply  of  radium.  The  behaviour  of  these  may  perhaps  be 
predictable,  but  if  so,  we  do  not  know  how  to  do  the  prediction. 


Can  Digital  Computers  Think?  I  485 


It  is,  however,  not  really  even  necessary  to  do  this.  It  is  not  difficult  to  design 
machines  whose  behaviour  appears  quite  random  to  anyone  who  does  not  know 
the  details  of  their  construction.  Naturally  enough  the  inclusion  of  this  random 
element,  whichever  technique  is  used,  does  not  solve  our  main  problem,  how  to 
programme  a  machine  to  imitate  a  brain,  or  as  we  might  say  more  briefly,  if  less 
accurately,  to  think.  But  it  gives  us  some  indication  of  what  the  process  will  be 
like.  We  must  not  always  expect  to  know  what  the  computer  is  going  to  do.  We 
should  be  pleased  when  the  machine  surprises  us,  in  rather  the  same  way  as  one 
is  pleased  when  a  pupil  does  something  which  he  had  not  been  explicitly  taught 
to  do. 

Let  us  now  reconsider  Lady  Lovelace’s  dictum.  ‘The  machine  can  do  whatever 
we  know  how  to  order  it  to  perform.’  The  sense  of  the  rest  of  the  passage  is  such 
that  one  is  tempted  to  say  that  the  machine  can  only  do  what  we  know  how  to 
order  it  to  perform.  But  I  think  this  would  not  be  true.  Certainly  the  machine  can 
only  do  what  we  do  order  it  to  perform,  anything  else  would  be  a  mechanical 
fault.  But  there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that,  when  we  give  it  its  orders  we  know 
what  we  are  doing,  what  the  consequences  of  these  orders  are  going  to  be.  One 
does  not  need  to  be  able  to  understand  how  these  orders  lead  to  the  machine’s 
subsequent  behaviour,  any  more  than  one  needs  to  understand  the  mechanism 
of  germination  when  one  puts  a  seed  in  the  ground.  The  plant  comes  up  whether 
one  understands  or  not.  If  we  give  the  machine  a  programme  which  results  in  its 
doing  something  interesting  which  we  had  not  anticipated  I  should  be  inclined 
to  say  that  the  machine  had  originated  something,  rather  than  to  claim  that  its 
behaviour  was  implicit  in  the  programme,  and  therefore  that  the  originality  lies 
entirely  with  us. 

I  will  not  attempt  to  say  much  about  how  this  process  of  ‘programming  a 
machine  to  think’  is  to  be  done.  The  fact  is  that  we  know  very  little  about  it,  and 
very  little  research  has  yet  been  done.  There  are  plentiful  ideas,  but  we  do  not  yet 
know  which  of  them  are  of  importance.  As  in  the  detective  stories,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  investigation  any  trifle  may  be  of  importance  to  the  investigator. 
When  the  problem  has  been  solved,  only  the  essential  facts  need  to  be  told  to  the 
jury.  But  at  present  we  have  nothing  worth  putting  before  a  jury.  I  will  only  say 
this,  that  I  believe  the  process  should  bear  a  close  relation  of  that  of  teaching. 

I  have  tried  to  explain  what  are  the  main  rational  arguments  for  and  against 
the  theory  that  machines  could  be  made  to  think,  but  something  should  also  be 
said  about  the  irrational  arguments.  Many  people  are  extremely  opposed  to  the 
idea  of  machine  that  thinks,  but  I  do  not  believe  that  it  is  for  any  of  the  reasons 
that  I  have  given,  or  any  other  rational  reason,  but  simply  because  they  do  not 
like  the  idea.  One  can  see  many  features  which  make  it  unpleasant.  If  a  machine 
can  think,  it  might  think  more  intelligently  than  we  do,  and  then  where  should 
we  be?  Even  if  we  could  keep  the  machines  in  a  subservient  position,  for  instance 
by  turning  off  the  power  at  strategic  moments,  we  should,  as  a  species,  feel 


486  I  Alan  Turing 


greatly  humbled.  A  similar  danger  and  humiliation  threatens  us  from  the  possib¬ 
ility  that  we  might  be  superseded  by  the  pig  or  the  rat.  This  is  a  theoretical 
possibility  which  is  hardly  controversial,  but  we  have  lived  with  pigs  and  rats  for 
so  long  without  their  intelligence  much  increasing,  that  we  no  longer  trouble 
ourselves  about  this  possibility.  We  feel  that  if  it  is  to  happen  at  all  it  will  not  be 
for  several  million  years  to  come.  But  this  new  danger  is  much  closer.  If  it  comes 
at  all  it  will  almost  certainly  be  within  the  next  millennium.  It  is  remote  but  not 
astronomically  remote,  and  is  certainly  something  which  can  give  us  anxiety. 

It  is  customary,  in  a  talk  or  article  on  this  subject,  to  offer  a  grain  of  comfort, 
in  the  form  of  a  statement  that  some  particularly  human  characteristic  could 
never  be  imitated  by  a  machine.  It  might  for  instance  be  said  that  no  machine 
could  write  good  English,  or  that  it  could  not  be  influenced  by  sex-appeal  or 
smoke  a  pipe.  I  cannot  offer  any  such  comfort,  for  I  believe  that  no  such  bounds 
can  be  set.  But  I  certainly  hope  and  believe  that  no  great  efforts  will  be  put  into 
making  machines  with  the  most  distinctively  human,  but  non-intellectual  char¬ 
acteristics  such  as  the  shape  of  the  human  body;  it  appears  to  me  to  be  quite 
futile  to  make  such  attempts  and  their  results  would  have  something  like  the 
unpleasant  quality  of  artificial  flowers.  Attempts  to  produce  a  thinking  machine 
seem  to  me  to  be  in  a  different  category.  The  whole  thinking  process  is  still  rather 
mysterious  to  us,  but  I  believe  that  the  attempt  to  make  a  thinking  machine  will 
help  us  greatly  in  finding  out  how  we  think  ourselves.