

Intelligent  Machinery  (1948) 

Alan  Turing 


Introduction 

Jack  Copeland 

Slow  Progress  on  the  ACE 

By  the  beginning  of  1947  much  effort  had  gone  into  writing  programmes  or 
‘instruction  tables’  for  the  ACE.  In  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’,  Turing  had 
said  that  work  on  instruction  tables  should  start  immediately,  since  the  ‘earlier 
stages  of  the  making  of  instruction  tables  will  have  serious  repercussions  on  the 
design  [of  the  machine]’;  moreover,  the  programming  work  should  ‘go  on  whilst 
the  machine  is  being  built,  in  order  to  avoid  some  of  the  delay  between  the 
delivery  of  the  machine  and  the  production  of  results’.1 

However,  little  progress  had  been  made  on  the  physical  construction  of  the 
ACE.  The  actual  engineering  work  was  being  carried  out  not  at  the  National 
Physical  Laboratory  but  at  the  Post  Office  Research  Station,  under  the  supervi¬ 
sion  of  Turing’s  wartime  associate  Flowers  (see  the  introductions  to  Chapters  4 
and  9).  Flowers  was  asked  by  the  NPL  early  in  1946  to  assist  with  the  engineering 
design  of,  and  to  build,  the  ACE.2  Ominously,  the  letter  of  agreement  from 
Flowers’s  superior  to  Turing’s  superior  spoke  of  ‘very  considerable  arrears  of 
work’  and  warned  that  ‘the  manpower  position  is  difficult’.3 

Initial  progress  was  nevertheless  promising,  with  some  early  successes  in  the 
experimental  work  on  the  delay  line  memory  units.  According  to  an  NPL 


1  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’,  18  (see  n.  6  of  the  introduction  to  Chapter  9).  A  digital  facsimile 
of  the  original  typescript  of  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the 
History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/proposed_electronic_calculator>.  Page  references  are  to  this 
typescript. 

2  Flowers  in  interview  with  Copeland  (July  1996). 

3  Letter  from  W.  G.  Radley  to  Womersley,  25  Feb.  1946  (Public  Record  Office,  Kew,  Richmond,  Surrey 
(document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ radley_womersley_25feb46 > ) . 


396  I  Jack  Copeland 


document  dated  March  1946,  ‘Mr.  Flowers  states  that  they  can  have  ready  for 
N.P.L.  a  minimal  ACE  by  August  or  September.’4  Unfortunately  it  proved  impos¬ 
sible  to  keep  to  Flowers’s  timetable.  Dollis  Hill  was  occupied  with  a  backlog  of 
urgent  work  on  the  national  telephone  system  (at  that  time  managed  by  the  Post 
Office).  Flowers’s  Section  was  ‘too  busy  to  do  other  people’s  work’  (he  said  in 
1998). 5  Only  two  men  could  be  spared  to  work  on  the  ACE,  Chandler  and 
Coombs  (both  of  whom  had  played  leading  roles  in  the  wartime  Colossus 
project). 

Sir  Charles  Darwin,  the  Director  of  the  NPL,  noted  in  August  1946  that  the 
Post  Office  was  ‘not  in  a  position  to  plunge  very  deep’,  and  by  November 
was  expressing  concern  to  Post  Office  staff  about  the  slow  rate  of  progress  on 
the  ACE.6  The  fault  was  not  all  with  the  Post  Office,  however.  In  November 
1946,  the  NPL  proposed  a  radical  change  in  the  hardware  design,  with  cathode 
ray  tube  memory  units  taking  the  place  of  mercury  delay  lines.7  Such  a 
change  would  have  meant  that  most  of  the  work  done  by  Chandler  and  Coombs 
up  to  that  point  was  wasted.  (In  the  end  CRT  memory  was  used  at  Manchester 
but  not  in  the  ACE.)  The  logical  design  kept  changing,  too — by  the  end  of  1946 
Turing  had  reached  Version  VII  of  the  ACE  design.8  Coombs  said: 

One  of  the  problems  was,  I  remember,  that  NPL  kept  on  changing  its  ideas,  and  every  time 
we  went  down  there  and  said  ‘Right  now!  What  do  you  want  us  to  make?’,  we’d  find  that 
the  last  idea,  that  they  gave  us  last  week,  was  old  hat  and  they’d  got  a  quite  different  one, 
and  we  couldn’t  get  a  consolidated  idea  at  all  until  eventually  we  dug  our  toes  in  and  said 
‘Stop!  Tell  us  what  to  make.’9 

Some  eight  years  later,  Chandler  and  Coombs  finally  completed  a  computer 
based  on  Version  VII  of  Turing’s  ACE  design,  the  MOSAIC  (see  the  introduction 
to  Chapter  9). 


4  ‘Status  of  the  Delay  Line  Computing  Machine  at  the  P.O.  Research  Station’,  National  Physical  Labora¬ 
tory,  7  Mar.  1946,  anon.  (Woodger  Papers,  National  Museum  of  Science  and  Industry,  Kensington,  London 
(catalogue  reference  Ml 2/ 105);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing 
<www.AlanTuring.net/ delay_line_status> ). 

5  Flowers  in  interview  with  Copeland  (July  1998). 

6  Letter  from  Darwin  to  Sir  Edward  Appleton,  13  Aug.  1946  (Public  Record  Office  (document 
reference  DSIR  10/275);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Compu¬ 
ting  <www.AlanTuring.net/darwin_appleton_13aug46>);  letter  from  Radley  to  Darwin,  1  Nov.  1946 
(Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  <www.AlanTuring.net/radley_darwin_lnov 
46>). 

7  Letter  from  Darwin  to  Radley,  26  Nov.  1946  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385); 
a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
darwin_radley_26nov46  > ) . 

8  See  B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.),  ‘The  Turing-Wilkinson  Lectures  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine’, 
in  K.  Furukawa,  D.  Michie,  and  S.  Muggleton  (eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  15  (Oxford  University  Press, 
1999). 

9  Coombs  in  interview  with  Christopher  Evans  in  1976  (‘The  Pioneers  of  Computing:  an  Oral  History  of 
Computing’  (London:  Science  Museum)). 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  397 


Turing  Proposes  an  ACE  Electronics  Section 

In  January  1947  Turing  had  gone  to  the  United  States,  visiting  several  of  the 
groups  there  that  were  attempting  to  build  an  electronic  stored-programme 
computer.  In  his  report  on  his  visit  he  wrote: 

One  point  concerning  the  form  of  organisation  struck  me  very  strongly.  The  engineering 
development  work  was  in  every  case  being  done  in  the  same  building  with  the  more 
mathematical  work.  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  the  right  approach.  It  is  not  possible  for 
the  two  parts  of  the  organisation  to  keep  in  sufficiently  close  touch  otherwise.  They  are  too 
deeply  interdependent.  We  are  frequently  finding  that  we  are  held  up  due  to  ignorance  of 
some  point  which  could  be  cleared  up  by  a  conversation  with  the  engineers,  and  the  Post 
Office  find  similar  difficulty;  a  telephone  conversation  is  seldom  effective  because  we 
cannot  use  diagrams.  Probably  more  important  are  the  points  which  are  misunderstood, 
but  which  would  be  cleared  up  if  closer  contact  were  maintained,  because  they  would 
come  to  light  in  casual  discussion.  It  is  clear  that  we  must  have  an  engineering  section  at 
the  ACE  site  eventually,  the  sooner  the  better,  I  would  say.10 

Darwin  suggested  to  Dr  Horace  Thomas,  a  member  of  the  NPL’s  Radio 
Division,  that  he  ‘be  put  in  charge  of  the  work  of  making  by  a  suitable  firm  a 
prototype  model’  of  the  ACE.11  A  ‘pre-prototype  model’  would  be  started  in- 
house  at  the  NPL  ‘in  Radio  and  Metrology  workshops  before  approaching  an 
outside  firm’,  Darwin  said,  and  ‘Metrology  and  Radio  workshops  could  get  on 
with  the  hardware  part  of  the  job  straight  away’.12  (The  outside  firm  eventually 
approached  was  English  Electric,  who  subsequently  built  and  marketed  the 
DEUCE  (see  the  introduction  to  Chapter  9).  In  1949  wiremen  and  engineers 
from  English  Electric  would  join  the  NPL  team  to  assist  with  the  completion  of 
Pilot  Model  ACE.13) 

Darwin’s  directive  that  an  in-house  electronics  section  begin  work  on  the 
hardware  took  several  months  to  implement,  however — the  wheels  of  adminis¬ 
tration  turned  slowly.  At  the  end  of  April  an  NPL  minute  spoke  of  the  need  for 


10  A.  M.  Turing,  ‘Report  on  visit  to  U.S.A.,  January  lst-20th,  1947’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  3  Feb. 
1947  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive 
for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/turing_usa_visit>). 

1 1  Report  by  Darwin  to  the  NPL  Executive  Committee  in  the  Minutes  of  the  Executive  Committee  for  1 8 
Mar.  1947  (NPL  library;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing 
<www.AlanTuring.net/ npl_minutes_mar 1 947> ) . 

12  Ibid. 

13  The  placing  of  a  contract  with  English  Electric  ‘[i]n  order  to  expedite  the  construction  of  [the]  pilot 
assembly  and  to  make  possible  the  construction  of  the  final  machine’  was  proposed  by  Mathematics 
Division  in  February  1949  and  approved  by  Treasury  in  May  of  that  year  (J.  R.  Womersley,  A.C.E.  Project: 
Present  Position,  and  request  for  financial  provision  for  a  Study  Contract  to  be  placed  with  the  English 
Electric  Co.  Ltd.’,  1  Feb.  1949  (Woodger  Papers;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ace_project_position>);  letter  from  Evans  to  Darwin,  28  May  1949 
(Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/275);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for 
the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/evans_darwin_28may49>)). 


398  I  Jack  Copeland 


an  electronics  group  working  ‘together  in  one  place  as  a  whole  in  close  contact 
with  the  planning  staff  in  the  Mathematics  Division’.14  The  minute  emphasized 
that  the  ‘various  parts’  of  the  ACE  project  were  ‘so  interwoven’  that  it  was  ‘not 
practicable  at  present  to  farm  out  portions  of  the  work  to  isolated  groups’, 
adding  ‘Our  experience  with  the  Post  Office  confirms  this.’  Yet  it  was  not  until 
August  that  suitable  staff  were  seconded  from  elsewhere  in  the  NPL  and  Tho¬ 
mas’s  electronics  group  finally  came  into  existence.15 

Womersley  proposed  that  the  new  group  should  complete  the  ‘Test  Assembly’, 
a  pilot  version  of  the  ACE  begun  by  Huskey  in  Mathematics  Division  in  the 
spring  of  1947  (see  the  introduction  to  Chapter  9). 16  Womersley’s  proposal  was 
disregarded,  however.  Thomas  was  an  empire-builder.  The  week  before  the 
official  launch  of  Thomas’s  electronics  group  on  18  August  1947,  E.  S.  Hiscocks, 
Secretary  to  the  NPL,  had  written: 

Thomas  has  apparently  shown  some  signs  of  behaving  as  if  he  is  starting  up  a  new 
Division,  and  so  as  to  allay  certain  qualms  which  both  Smith-Rose  and  Womersley 
have,  I  think  it  would  be  better  for  it  to  be  explained  to  the  whole  team  that  Mathematics 
Division  is  the  parent  Division,  and  the  one  which  is  to  justify  the  financial  outlay  on  this 
work;  that  the  work  is  being  put  out  on  contract,  as  it  were,  to  Radio  Division,  and  that 
Thomas’s  team  is  a  part  of  Radio  Division.  I  think,  even  if  only  for  our  own  peace  of  mind, 
this  is  desirable,  because  Thomas  has  already  shown  some  signs  of  wanting  to  set  up  a 
separate  office,  etc.17 

Unfortunately  Thomas  ‘didn’t  like . . .  the  idea  of  this  group  in  Mathematics 
Division  . . .  working  independently’,  Wilkinson  recalled.18  Rivalry  quickly  sprang 
up  between  Thomas’s  group  in  Radio  Division  and  the  ACE  Section  in  Math¬ 
ematics  Division,  and  soon  after  Thomas’s  appointment  the  work  on  the  Test 
Assembly  was  summarily  stopped  by  Darwin.  This  was  a  dire  turn  of  events — in 
Huskey’s  words,  ‘morale  in  the  Mathematics  Division  collapsed’.19 


14  J.  R.  Womersley  and  R.  L.  Smith-Rose,  A.C.E.  Pilot  Test  Assembly  and  later  Development’,  National 
Physical  Laboratory,  30  Apr.  1947  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital 
facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/pilot_test_ 
assembly>). 

15  Memorandum  from  Hiscocks  to  Womersley,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  6  Aug.  1947  (Public  Record 
Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/hiscocks_womersley_6aug47>). 

16  A.C.E.  Project’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  21  Aug.  1947,  initialled  ‘JWC/JG’  (Public  Record  Office 
(document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ace_project_meeting>). 

17  Letter  from  Hiscocks  to  Darwin,  12  Aug.  1947  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/ 
385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
hiscocks_darwin_  1 2aug47  > ) . 

18  Wilkinson  in  interview  with  Evans  in  1976  (‘The  Pioneers  of  Computing:  An  Oral  History  of 
Computing’  (London:  Science  Museum)). 

19  H.  D.  Huskey,  ‘From  ACE  to  the  G-15’,  Annals  of  the  History  of  Computing,  6  (1984),  350-71  (361). 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  399 


The  Test  Assembly — based  on  Version  V  of  Turing’s  design  for  the  ACE20 — was 
in  fact  a  highly  promising  project  and  considerable  progress  had  been  made 
during  the  course  of  1947.  By  August  1947  the  NPL  workshops  were  fabricating  a 
mercury  delay  line  to  Huskey’s  specifications,  valve  types  had  been  chosen  and 
circuit  block  diagrams  made,  source  and  destination  decisions  had  been  taken, 
and  programmes  were  being  written  to  check  these  decisions.21  In  October, 
Womersley  and  E.  C.  Fieller  (who  became  Superintendent  of  Mathematics 
Division  when  Womersley  left  in  1950)  expected,  optimistically,  that  the  Test 
Assembly  would  ‘be  ready  by  the  end  of  November’.22 

Work  on  building  the  ACE  drew  nearly  to  a  standstill  after  Thomas  persuaded 
Darwin  to  shut  down  the  Test  Assembly.  Only  two  members  of  Thomas’s  group 
were  skilled  in  digital  electronics  and  they  knew  little  about  computers.  Thomas’s 
own  background  was  not  in  digital  electronics  at  all  but  in  radio  and  industrial 
electronics.  The  group  ‘began  to  develop  their  knowledge  of  pulse  techniques’, 
said  Wilkinson,  and  ‘for  a  while  they  just  did  basic  things  and  became  more 
familiar  with  the  electronics  they  needed  to  learn  to  build  a  computer’.  Then,  in 
February  1948,  Thomas  resigned  from  the  NPL  to  join  Unilever  Ltd.  (the 
manufacturers  of  ‘Sunlight’  soap).  As  Womersley  summed  up  the  situation  in 
April  1948,  hardware  development  was  ‘probably  as  far  advanced  18  months 
ago’.23 

Given  only  slightly  better  management  on  the  NPL’s  part,  a  minimal  computer 
based  on  Turing’s  Version  V  of  the  ACE  design  could  probably  have  been  working 
at  the  NPL  during  1948.  By  September  1947  the  NPL  had  an  electronics  group 
which,  by  joining  forces  with  Huskey  and  the  ACE  Section,  would  have  been 
capable  of  carrying  Huskey’s  Test  Assembly  to  completion.  (Huskey  said:  ‘I  never 
hoped  to  have  the  Test  Assembly  working  before  I  left  [the  NPL  for  the  USA]  in 
December.  I  certainly  hoped  the  group  would  have  it  working  in  1948.’)  Womers¬ 
ley  had  advocated  this  course  of  action  but  Thomas  threw  a  spanner  in  the 
works.24  The  Test  Assembly  could  easily  have  been  the  world’s  first  electronic 


20  M.  Woodger,  ‘ACE  Test  Assembly,  Sept./Oct.  1947’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  n.d.  (Woodger 
Papers  (catalogue  reference  M15/84);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  < www. AlanTuring. net/ test_assembly > ) . 

21  Letter  from  Huskey  to  Copeland  (3  June  2003). 

22  E.  C.  Fieller,  ‘Hollerith  Equipment  for  A.C.E.  Work  -  Immediate  Requirements’,  National  Physical 
Laboratory,  16  Oct.  1947  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in 
The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/hollerith_equipment>). 

23  Minutes  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory  for  20  Apr.  1948  (NPL 
library;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
npl_minutes_apr 1 948 > ) . 

24  J.  R.  Womersley,  A.C.E.  Project’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  n.d.,  attached  to  a  letter  from  Womers¬ 
ley  to  the  Secretary  of  the  NPL  dated  21  Aug.  1947  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/ 
385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
womersley_ace_project> ) . 


400  I  Jack  Copeland 


stored-programme  digital  computer  to  run  a  trial  calculation  (a  title  that  in  the 
event  went  to  the  Manchester  ‘Baby’  in  June  1948). 

Following  Thomas’s  replacement  by  Francis  Colebrook  in  March  1948  the 
fortunes  of  the  ACE  did  at  last  begin  to  improve.  Colebrook  drew  the  ACE 
Section  and  the  Electronics  Section  together  to  work  harmoniously  on  what 
became  the  Pilot  Model  ACE  (see  the  introduction  to  Chapter  9).25  But  Turing 
did  not  wait. 


Turing  Leaves  the  National  Physical  Laboratory 

In  the  middle  of  1947  a  thoroughly  disheartened  Turing  applied  for  a  twelve- 
month  period  of  sabbatical  leave  to  be  spent  in  Cambridge.  The  purpose  of  the 
leave,  as  described  by  Darwin  in  July  1947,  was  to  enable  Turing 

to  extend  his  work  on  the  machine  [the  ACE]  still  further  towards  the  biological  side.  I  can 
best  describe  it  by  saying  that  hitherto  the  machine  has  been  planned  for  work  equivalent 
to  that  of  the  lower  parts  of  the  brain,  and  he  [Turing]  wants  to  see  how  much  a  machine 
can  do  for  the  higher  ones;  for  example,  could  a  machine  be  made  that  could  learn  by 
experience?  This  will  be  theoretical  work,  and  better  done  away  from  here.26 

Turing  left  the  NPL  for  Cambridge  in  the  autumn  of  1947.27  Then  in  May  1948 
he  gave  up  his  position  at  the  NPL  altogether,  breaking  what  Darwin  referred  to 
as  ‘a  gentleman’s  agreement  to  return  here  for  at  least  two  years  after  the  year’s 
absence’.28  Newman’s  offer  of  a  job  lured  a  ‘very  fed  up’  Turing — Robin  Gandy’s 
description29 — to  Manchester  University,  where  in  May  1948  he  was  appointed 
Deputy  Director  of  the  Computing  Machine  Laboratory  (there  being  no  dir¬ 
ector).30 


25  The  Thomas  era  and  the  ACE’s  change  in  fortunes  under  Colebrook  are  described  in  B.  J.  Copeland, 
‘The  Origins  and  Development  of  the  ACE  Project’,  in  B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.),  Alan  Turing's  Automatic 
Computing  Engine  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  2004). 

26  Letter  from  Darwin  to  Appleton,  23  July  1947  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/ 
385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
darwin_appleton_23jul47  > ) . 

27  Probably  at  the  end  of  September.  Turing  was  still  at  the  NPL  when  Geoff  Hayes  arrived  in  Maths 
Division  on  23  Sept.  1947  (communication  from  Hayes  to  Woodger,  Nov.  1979).  Turing  was  on  half-pay 
during  his  sabbatical  (Minutes  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory  for  28  Sept. 
1948  (NPL  library;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.Alan 
Turing.net/npl_minutes_septl948>)).  Darwin  was  in  favour  of  paying  Turing  his  full  salary,  but  Turing 
preferred  not,  ‘because  if  he  were  earning  full  pay,  he  would  feel  that  “I  ought  not  to  play  tennis  in  the 
morning,  when  I  want  to’”  (Darwin  to  Appleton,  23  July  1947  (see  n.  26)). 

28  Darwin  to  Appleton,  23  July  1947  (see  n.  26). 

29  Gandy  in  interview  with  Copeland  (Oct.  1995). 

30  Turing’s  salary  was  paid  wholly  from  a  Royal  Society  grant  to  Newman  for  the  purpose  of  developing  a 
stored-programme  electronic  computer  (letter  from  Newman  to  D.  Brunt  at  the  Royal  Society,  22  Dec.  1948; 
a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/newman_ 
brunt_22dec48  > ) . 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  401 


At  Manchester,  Turing  designed  the  input  mechanism  and  program¬ 
ming  system  for  an  expanded  version  of  Kilburn  and  William’s  ‘Baby’  (see 
the  introduction  to  Chapter  9)  and  wrote  a  programming  manual  for 
the  new  machine.31  At  last  Turing  had  his  hands  on  a  functioning  stored- 
programme  computer.  He  was  soon  using  it  to  model  biological  growth — 
pioneering  work  in  the  field  now  known  as  Artificial  Life  (see  Chapter  15  and 
‘Artifical  Life’). 


The  First  Manifesto  of  Artificial  Intelligence 

In  the  summer  of  1948  Turing  completed  a  report  for  Darwin  describing 
the  outcomes  of  his  research  into  ‘how  much  a  machine  can  do  for  the  higher’ 
parts  of  the  brain.32  It  was  entitled  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’.  Donald  Michie 
recalls  that  Turing  ‘was  in  a  state  of  some  agitation  about  its  reception  by  his 
superiors  at  NPL:  “A  bit  thin  for  a  year’s  time  off!”’33  The  headmasterly 
Darwin — who  once  complained  about  the  ‘smudgy’  appearance  of  Turing’s 
work34 — was,  as  Turing  predicted,  displeased  with  the  report,  describing  it  as  a 
‘schoolboy’s  essay’  and  ‘not  suitable  for  publication’.35  In  reality  this  far-sighted 
paper  was  the  first  manifesto  of  AI;  sadly  Turing  never  published  it. 

‘Intelligent  Machinery’  is  a  wide-ranging  and  strikingly  original  survey  of  the 
prospects  for  Artificial  Intelligence.  In  it  Turing  brilliantly  introduced  many  of 
the  concepts  that  were  later  to  become  central  in  the  field,  in  some  cases  after 
reinvention  by  others.  These  included  the  logic-based  approach  to  problem¬ 
solving,  and  the  idea,  subsequently  made  popular  by  Newell  and  Simon,  that 
(as  Turing  put  it)  ‘intellectual  activity  consists  mainly  of  various  kinds  of  search’ 
(p.  431).  Turing  anticipated  the  concept  of  a  genetic  algorithm  (GA),  in  a  brief 
passage  concerning  what  he  calls  ‘genetical  or  evolutionary  search’  (see  further 
Chapter  11,  p.  463,  and  ‘Artificial  Life’).  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  also  contains  the 
earliest  description  of  (a  restricted  form  of)  what  Turing  was  later  to  call  the 
‘imitation  game’  and  is  now  known  simply  as  the  Turing  test  (see  further  Chapter 

31  Letter  from  Williams  to  Brain  Randell  (1972);  printed  on  p.  9  of  B.  Randell,  ‘On  Alan  Turing  and  the 
Origins  of  Digital  Computers’,  in  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  5  (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh  University  Press,  1972);  Turing,  Programmers'  Handbook  for  Manchester  Electronic  Computer 
(University  of  Manchester  Computing  Machine  Laboratory,  1950;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing 
Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/programmers_handbook>). 

32  During  his  sabbatical  year  Turing  also  proved  that  the  word  problem  for  semi-groups  with  cancellation 
is  unsolvable  (A.  M.  Turing,  ‘The  Word  Problem  in  Semi-Groups  with  Cancellation’,  Annals  of  Mathematics, 
52  (1950),  491-505). 

33  Michie,  unpublished  note  (in  the  Woodger  papers). 

34  Letter  from  Darwin  to  Turing,  11  Nov.  1947  (in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College,  Cam¬ 
bridge  (catalogue  reference  D  5);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing 
<www.AlanTuring.net/ darwin_turing_  1 1  nov47  > ) . 

35  Gandy  in  interview  with  Copeland  (Oct.  1995);  Minutes  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  National 
Physical  Laboratory  for  28  Sept.  1948. 


402  I  Jack  Copeland 


11).  The  major  part  of ‘Intelligent  Machinery’,  however,  consists  of  an  exquisite 
discussion  of  machine  learning,  in  which  Turing  anticipated  the  modern  ap¬ 
proach  to  AI  known  as  connectionism. 


Expert  Systems 

Search  and  the  logic-based  approach  are  both  used  in  modern  ‘expert  systems’. 
An  expert  system  is  an  AI  programme  for  solving  problems  and  giving  advice 
within  a  specialized  field  of  knowledge,  such  as  medical  diagnosis  or  corporate 
planning.  The  area  of  expert  systems  is  one  of  the  most  successful  in  modern  AI. 

The  basic  components  of  an  expert  system  are  a  knowledge  base  (KB),  an 
inference  engine,  and  a  search  engine  for  searching  the  KB.  The  KB  is  built  up  by 
interviewing  (human)  experts  in  the  area  in  question.  A  ‘knowledge  engineer’ 
organizes  the  information  elicited  from  the  experts  into  a  system  of  propositions, 
typically  of  ‘if-then’  form. 

The  inference  engine  enables  the  expert  system  to  draw  deductions  from 
propositions  in  the  KB.  For  example,  from  two  propositions  ‘if  x  then  /  and 
‘if  y  then  z’,  the  inference  engine  is  able  to  deduce  ‘if  x  then  z’.  The  expert  system 
might  then  query  its  user  ‘Is  x  true  in  the  situation  that  we  are  considering?’  (e.g. 
‘Does  the  patient  have  a  rash?’),  and  if  the  answer  is  affirmative,  the  system  will 
proceed  to  infer  z. 

Modern  systems  using  search  and  inference  can  produce  impressive  results. 
For  example,  Douglas  Lenat’s  common-sense  reasoning  system  CYC  is  able  to 
conclude  ‘Garcia  is  wet’  from  the  statement  ‘Garcia  is  finishing  a  marathon  run’, 
by  means  of  searching  for  and  using  such  items  of  common-sense  knowledge  as 
that  running  a  marathon  entails  high  exertion,  that  people  sweat  at  high  levels  of 
exertion,  and  that  when  something  sweats  it  is  wet. 


Connectionism 

Connectionism — still  in  its  infancy — is  the  science  of  computing  with  networks 
of  artificial  neurons.  This  approach  came  to  widespread  attention  in  the  mid- 
1980s  when  a  group  based  at  the  University  of  California  at  San  Diego  reported 
some  striking  experiments.  In  one,  an  artificial  neural  network  learned  to  form 
the  past  tenses  of  English  verbs,  responding  correctly  to  irregular  verbs  not 
previously  encountered  (such  as  ‘weep’  and  ‘cling’).36 


36  D.  E.  Rumelhart  and  J.  L.  McClelland,  ‘On  Learning  the  Past  Tenses  of  English  Verbs’,  in  J.  L. 
McClelland,  D.  E.  Rumelhart,  and  the  PDP  Research  Group,  Parallel  Distributed  Processing:  Explorations 
in  the  Microstructure  of  Cognition,  ii:  Psychological  and  Biological  Models  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press, 
1986). 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  403 


Modern  connectionists  regard  Donald  Hebb37  and  Frank  Rosenblatt38  as  the 
founding  figures  of  their  approach  and  it  is  not  widely  realized  that  Turing  wrote  a 
blueprint  for  much  of  the  connectionist  project  as  early  as  1948. 39  In  ‘Intelligent 
Machinery’  he  introduced  what  he  called  ‘unorganised  machines’,  giving  as 
examples  networks  of  neuron-like  elements  connected  together  in  a  largely  random 
manner.  He  described  a  certain  type  of  network  as  ‘the  simplest  model  of  a  nervous 
system’  (p.  418).  From  a  historical  point  of  view,  his  idea  that  an  initially  unorgan¬ 
ized  neural  network  can  be  organized  by  means  of  ‘interfering  training’  is  of 
considerable  significance,  since  it  did  not  appear  in  the  earlier  work  of  McCulloch 
and  Pitts  (see  below).40  In  Turing’s  model,  the  training  process  renders  certain 
neural  pathways  effective  and  others  ineffective.  So  far  as  is  known,  he  was  the  first 
person  to  consider  building  computing  machines  out  of  trainable  networks  of 
randomly  arranged  neuron-like  elements. 


B-Type  Unorganized  Machines 

In  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  Turing  introduced  the  type  of  neural  network  that  he 
called  a  ‘B-type  unorganised  machine’.  A  B-type  consists  of  interconnected 
artificial  neurons,  depicted  in  Figure  10.1  as  circles,  and  connection-modifiers, 
depicted  as  squares.  A  B-type  may  contain  any  number  of  neurons  connected 
together  in  any  pattern,  but  subject  always  to  the  restriction  that  each  neuron-to- 
neuron  connection  passes  through  a  connection-modifier  (Figure  10.2).  The 
connection-modifiers  are  used  in  training  the  network. 

Turing’s  model  neurons  work  as  follows.  Each  neuron  has  two  input  fibres, 
and  the  output  of  a  neuron  is  a  simple  logical  function  of  its  two  inputs.  Every 
neuron  in  the  network  performs  the  same  logical  operation,  ‘nand’  (Table  1). 

: 

Figure  10.1.  Two  neurons  from  a  B-type  network.  The  two  fibres  on  the  connection- 
modifier  between  the  neurons  enable  training  by  an  external  agent. 


37  D.  O.  Hebb,  The  Organization  of  Behavior:  A  Neuropsychological  Theory  (New  York:  John  Wiley,  1949). 

38  F.  Rosenblatt,  Principles  of  Neurodynamics  (Washington,  DC:  Spartan,  1962). 

39  See  further  B.  J.  Copeland  and  D.  Proudfoot,  ‘On  Alan  Turing’s  Anticipation  of  Connectionism’ 
( Synthese ,  108  (1996),  361-77)  and  ‘Alan  Turing’s  Forgotten  Ideas  in  Computer  Science’  (Scientific  Ameri¬ 
can,  280  (1999),  99-103). 

40  W.  S.  McCulloch  and  W.  Pitts,  ‘A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent  in  Nervous  Activity’,  Bulletin 
of  Mathematical  Biophysics,  5  (1943),  115-33. 


404  I  Jack  Copeland 


Figure  10.2.  A  fragment  of  a  large,  intially  random  B-type  neural  network 


Table  1  Behaviour  of  a  nand-neuron 


Input- 1 

Input-2 

Output 













Turing  chose  nand  as  the  basic  operation  of  his  model  neurons  because  every 
other  boolean  operation  can  be  carried  out  by  groups  of  nand-neurons.  Turing 
showed  that  even  the  connection-modifier  itself  can  be  built  out  of  nand- 
neurons.  So  each  B-type  network  consists  of  nothing  more  than  nand-neurons 
and  their  connecting  fibres.  This  is  about  the  simplest  possible  model  of  the 
cortex. 


Training  a  B-Type 

Each  connection-modifier  has  two  training  fibres  (Figure  10.1).  Applying  a  pulse 
to  one  fibre  sets  the  modifier  to  interchange  mode.  When  the  modifier  is  in 
interchange  mode  and  the  input  into  the  modifier  is  1,  the  modifier’s  output  is  0; 
and  when  the  input  is  0,  the  output  is  1. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  405 


The  effect  of  a  pulse  on  the  other  training  fibre  is  to  place  the  modifier  in 
interrupt  mode.  In  this  mode,  the  output  of  the  modifier  is  always  1,  no  matter 
what  its  input.  When  in  interrupt  mode,  the  modifier  destroys  all  information 
attempting  to  pass  along  the  connection  to  which  the  modifier  is  attached.  Once 
set,  a  modifier  will  maintain  its  function  unless  it  receives  a  pulse  on  the  other 
training  fibre. 

The  presence  of  these  connection-modifiers  enables  a  B-type  unorganized 
machine  to  be  trained,  by  means  of  what  Turing  called  ‘appropriate  interference, 
mimicking  education’  (p.  422).  Turing  theorized  that  ‘the  cortex  of  an  infant  is 
an  unorganised  machine,  which  can  be  organised  by  suitable  interfering  training’ 
(p.  424). 

Initially  a  network  that  is  to  be  trained  contains  random  inter-neural  connec¬ 
tions,  and  the  modifiers  on  these  connections  are  also  set  randomly  (Figure 
10.2).  Unwanted  connections  are  destroyed  by  switching  their  attached  modifiers 
to  interrupt  mode.  The  output  of  the  neuron  immediately  upstream  of  the 
modifier  no  longer  finds  its  way  along  the  connection  to  the  neuron  on  the 
downstream  end  (see  Table  1).  Conversely,  switching  the  setting  of  the  modifier 
on  an  initially  interrupted  connection  to  the  other  mode  is  in  effect  to  create  a 
new  connection.  This  selective  culling  and  enlivening  of  connections  hones  the 
initially  random  network  into  one  organized  for  a  given  task. 


Neural  Simulation 

Turing  wished  to  investigate  other  types  of  ‘unorganised  machine’,  and  he 
envisaged  the  procedure — nowadays  used  extensively  by  connectionists — of 
simulating  a  neural  network  and  its  training  regimen  using  an  ordinary  digital 
computer  (just  as  an  engineer  may  use  a  computer  to  simulate  an  aircraft  wing 
or  a  weather  analyst  to  simulate  a  storm  system).  He  would,  he  said,  ‘allow  the 
whole  system  to  run  for  an  appreciable  period,  and  then  break  in  as  a  kind  of 
“inspector  of  schools”  and  see  what  progress  had  been  made’  (p.  428). 

However,  Turing’s  research  on  neural  networks  was  carried  out  shortly  before 
the  first  general-purpose  electronic  computers  were  up  and  running,  and  he  used 
only  paper  and  pencil.  Once  he  did  have  access  to  a  computer  in  the  Manchester 
Computing  Machine  Laboratory,  Turing  turned  his  attention  to  research  in 
Artificial  Life,  and  he  seems  never  to  have  used  computer  simulation  to  explore 
the  behaviour  of  neural  networks. 

In  the  year  of  Turing’s  death  (1954),  two  researchers  at  MIT,  Wesley  Clark 
and  Belmont  Farley,  succeeded  in  running  the  first  computer  simulations  of 
neural  networks.  Clark  and  Farley  were  unaware  of  Turing’s  earlier  work  and 
their  neural  architecture  was  quite  different  from  his,  using  inter-neural  connec¬ 
tions  of  variable  ‘weight’  (or  ‘strength’).  Clark  and  Farley  were  able  to  train  their 


406  I  Jack  Copeland 


networks — which  contained  a  maximum  of  128  neurons — to  recognize  simple 
patterns.41  (In  addition,  they  discovered  that  the  random  destruction  of  up  to  10 
per  cent  of  the  neurons  in  a  trained  network  does  not  affect  the  network’s 
performance  at  its  task.)  The  work  begun  by  Clark  and  Farley  was  considerably 
developed  by  Rosenblatt,  in  whose  theory  of  ‘perceptions’  modern  connection- 
ism  took  shape.42  Meanwhile,  Turing’s  pioneering  work  on  a  distinctively  differ¬ 
ent  type  of  connectionist  architecture  was  forgotten. 


B-Types  Redefined 

There  appears  to  be  an  inconsistency  in  Turing’s  presentation  of  B-types.  He 
claimed  that  B-types  are  able,  with  appropriate  modifier  settings,  to  ‘do  any 
required  job,  given  sufficient  time  and  provided  the  number  of  units  [i.e. 
neurons]  is  sufficient’  (p.  422).  This  claim  is  false.43  The  problem  lies  with  the 
connection-modifiers.  If  each  modifier  must  either  interrupt  or  interchange, 
then  there  are  simple  logical  operations  that  no  B-type  can  perform.  For 
example,  no  B-type  can  produce  the  exclusive  disjunction  of  a  pair  of  inputs 
(Table  2).  Nor  can  a  B-type  compute  the  identity  function  (i.e.  produce  outputs 
identical  to  its  inputs).  In  effect  the  difficulty  is  one  that  Turing  mentions  in  a 
different  connection.  In  Chapter  17  he  points  out  that  ‘an  odd  number  of... 
interchanges . . .  can  never  bring  one  back  to  where  one  started’  (p.  589). 

A  simple  remedy  is  to  use  connection-modifiers  that,  when  not  in  interrupt 
mode,  are  in  pass  mode  rather  than  interchange  mode.44  In  pass  mode  the 
modifier’s  output  is  identical  to  its  input.  Turing’s  claim  that  B-types  can  ‘do 
any  required  job...’  is  true  if  the  two  available  modes  of  each  modifier  are 
interrupt  and  pass. 

The  required  interrupt/pass  modifiers  can  in  fact  be  built  out  of  pairs  of 
interrupt/interchange  modifiers.  A  pair  of  modifiers  both  in  interchange  mode 
amounts  to  a  single  modifier  in  pass  mode.  Similarly,  a  pair  of  modifiers  whose 
downstream  member  is  in  interrupt  mode  functions  indistinguishably  from  a 
single  modifier  in  interrupt  mode. 


41  B.  G.  Farley  and  W.  A.  Clark,  ‘Simulation  of  Self- Organising  Systems  by  Digital  Computer’,  Institute  of 
Radio  Engineers  Transactions  on  Information  Theory,  4  (1954),  76-84;  W.  A.  Clark  and  B.  G.  Farley, 
‘Generalisation  of  Pattern  Recognition  in  a  Self- Organising  System’,  in  Proceedings  of  the  Western  Joint 
Computer  Conference  (1955). 

42  F.  Rosenblatt,  ‘The  Perceptron,  a  Perceiving  and  Recognizing  Automaton’,  Cornell  Aeronautical 
Laboratory  Report  No.  85-460- 1  ( 1957);  ‘The  Perceptron:  a  Theory  of  Statistical  Separability  in  Cognitive  Sys¬ 
tems’,  Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory  Report  No.  VG-1196-G-1  (1958);  ‘The  Perception:  a  Probabilistic 
Model  for  Information  Storage  and  Organisation  in  the  Brain’,  Psychological  Review,  65  (1958),  386-408. 

43  Copeland  and  Proudfoot,  ‘On  Alan  Turing’s  Anticipation  of  Connectionism’,  367. 

44  Ibid.  367-8. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  407 


Table  2  Exclusive  disjunction  (XOR) 


Input- 1 

Input-2 

Output 













B-Types  and  the  Universal  Turing  Machine 

Turing  claimed  a  proof  (not  given  in  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  and  now  lost)  of  the 
proposition  that  an  initially  unorganized  B-type  network  with  sufficient  neurons 
can  be  organized  (via  its  connection-modifiers)  to  become  ‘a  universal  Turing 
machine  with  a  given  storage  capacity’  (p.  422) — i.e.  to  become  equivalent  to  a 
universal  Turing  machine  with  a  truncated  tape. 

This  feature  of  neural  networks  may  shed  light  on  one  of  the  most  fundamental 
problems  concerning  human  cognition.  Examining  cognition  from  a  top-down 
perspective,  we  find  complex  sequential  processes,  often  involving  language  or 
other  forms  of  symbolic  representation — for  example,  logical  reasoning,  the 
planning  out  of  activities,  and  mathematical  calculation.  Yet  from  a  bottom-up 
perspective,  cognition  is  nothing  but  the  simple  firings  of  neurons.  How  is  the 
view  from  the  top  to  be  reconciled  with  the  prima  facie  very  different  view  from 
the  bottom? 

Turing’s  proof  first  opened  up  the  possibility,  noted  in  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’ 
(p.  424),  that  the  brain  is  in  part  a  universal  computing  machine  (of  a  given  storage 
capacity)  implemented  in  a  neural  network.  This,  then,  is  a  possible  solution  to  the 
fundamental  problem:  it  is  by  virtue  of  being  a  neural  network  acting  as  a  universal 
computing  machine  (of  a  given  storage  capacity)  that  the  cortex  is  able  to  carry  out 
the  sequential,  symbol-rich  processing  discerned  in  the  view  from  the  top.  In  1948 
this  hypothesis  was  well  ahead  of  its  time,  and  today  it  remains  one  of  our  best 
guesses  concerning  the  fundamental  problem  of  cognitive  science. 


McCulloch— Pitts  Neural  Nets 

It  is  interesting  that  Turing  makes  no  reference  in  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  to  the 
now  famous  work  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  itself  influenced  by  his  own  ‘On 
Computable  Numbers’.  Their  1943  article  represents  the  first  attempt  to  apply 
what  they  call  ‘the  Turing  definition  of  computability’  to  the  study  of  neuronal 
function.45  Like  Turing,  McCulloch  and  Pitts  considered  networks  of  simple 


45  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  ‘A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent  in  Nervous  Activity’,  129. 


408  I  Jack  Copeland 


two-state  boolean  ‘neurons’,  although  there  were  important  differences  between 
McCulloch-Pitts  nets  and  Turing  nets.  For  example,  inhibitory  synapses  are  a 
fundamental  feature  of  McCulloch-Pitts  nets  but  not  of  Turing  nets.  (An  input 
of  1  at  an  inhibitory  synapse  at  moment  m  unconditionally  sets  the  output  of  the 
unit  to  0  at  m  +  1.) 

McCulloch  stressed  the  extent  to  which  his  and  Pitts’s  work  is  indebted  to 
Turing  in  the  course  of  some  autobiographical  remarks  made  during  the  public 
discussion  of  a  lecture  given  by  von  Neumann  in  1948: 

I  started  at  entirely  the  wrong  angle... and  it  was  not  until  I  saw  Turing’s  paper  [‘On 
Computable  Numbers’]  that  I  began  to  get  going  the  right  way  around,  and  with  Pitts’ 
help  formulated  the  required  logical  calculus.  What  we  thought  we  were  doing  (and  I 
think  we  succeeded  fairly  well)  was  treating  the  brain  as  a  Turing  machine.46 

Turing  had  undoubtedly  heard  something  of  the  work  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts. 
Wiener — with  McCulloch  a  founding  member  of  the  cybernetics  movement — 
would  almost  certainly  have  mentioned  McCulloch  in  the  course  of  his  ‘talk  over 
the  fundamental  ideas  of  cybernetics  with  Mr  Turing’  at  the  NPL  in  the  spring  of 
1947.47  Moreover,  von  Neumann  mentioned  the  McCulloch-Pitts  article  of 
1943 — albeit  very  briefly — in  the  ‘First  Draft  of  a  Report  on  the  ED  VAC’,  which 
Turing  read  in  1945.  In  order  to  depict  the  EDVAC’s  logic  gates,  von  Neumann 
employed  a  modified  version  of  the  diagrammatic  notation  for  neural  nets 
used  by  McCulloch  and  Pitts.  (In  his  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’  (see 
Chapter  9)  Turing  considerably  extended  the  notation  that  he  found  in  the 
‘First  Draft’.48)  Turing  and  McCulloch  seem  not  to  have  met  until  1949.  After 
their  meeting  Turing  spoke  dismissively  of  McCulloch,  referring  to  him  as  a 
‘charlatan’.49 

It  is  an  open  question  whether  the  work  of  McCulloch  and  Pitts  had  any 
influence  at  all  on  the  development  of  the  ideas  presented  in  ‘Intelligent  Ma¬ 
chinery’.  Probably  not.  As  Newman  once  remarked  of  Turing:  ‘It  was,  perhaps,  a 
defect  of  his  qualities  that  he  found  it  hard  to  use  the  work  of  others,  preferring 
to  work  things  out  for  himself.’50 

Whatever  the  influences  were  on  Turing  at  that  time,  there  is  no  doubt  that  his 
work  on  neural  nets  goes  importantly  beyond  the  earlier  work  of  McCulloch  and 
Pitts.  The  latter  give  only  a  perfunctory  discussion  of  learning,  saying  no  more 
than  that  the  mechanisms  supposedly  underlying  learning  in  the  brain — they 
specifically  mention  the  formation  of  new  connections  and  neuronal  threshold 

46  J.  von  Neumann,  Collected  Works ,  vol.  v,  ed.  A.  H.  Taub  (Oxford:  Pergamon  Press,  1963),  319. 

47  N.  Wiener,  Cybernetics  (New  York:  John  Wiley,  1948),  32. 

48  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’;  see  also  D.  R.  Hartree,  Calculating  Instruments  and  Machines 
(Illinois:  University  of  Illinois  Press,  1949),  97,  102,  and  B.  E.  Carpenter  and  R.  W.  Doran  (eds.),  A.  M. 
Turing’s  ACE  Report  of  1946  and  Other  Papers  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  1986),  277 . 

49  Gandy  in  interview  with  Copeland  (Oct.  1995). 

50  Manchester  Guardian,  1 1  June  1954. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  409 


change — can  be  mimicked  by  means  of  nets  whose  connections  and  thresholds 
are  fixed.51  Turing’s  idea  of  using  supervised  interference  to  train  an  initially 
random  arrangement  of  neurons  to  compute  a  specified  function  is  nowhere 
prefigured. 


Further  reading 

Copeland,  B.  J.,  and  Proudfoot,  D.,  ‘On  Alan  Turing’s  Anticipation  of  Connectionism’, 
Synthese,  108  (1996),  361-77.  Reprinted  in  R.  Chrisley  (ed.),  Artificial  Intelligence: 
Critical  Concepts  in  Cognitive  Science ,  ii:  Symbolic  AI  (London:  Routledge,  2000). 
Jackson,  P.,  Introduction  to  Expert  Systems  (Wokingham:  Addison- Wesley,  1986). 
Rumelhart,  D.  E.,  McClelland,  J.  L.,  and  the  PDP  Research  Group,  Parallel  Distributed 
Processing:  Explorations  in  the  Microstructure  of  Cognition ,  i:  Foundations,  (Cambridge, 
Mass.:  MIT  Press,  1986). 


Provenance 

What  follows  is  the  text  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory  document  ‘Intelli¬ 
gent  Machinery:  A  Report  by  A.  M.  Turing’  (dated  1948). 52  Symbols  missing 
from  the  Report  itself  but  present  in  Turing’s  draft  typescript  have  been 
restored.53 


51  McCulloch  and  Pitts,  ‘A  Logical  Calculus  of  the  Ideas  Immanent  in  Nervous  Activity’,  117,  124. 

52  ‘Intelligent  Machinery:  A  Report  by  A.  M.  Turing’  is  in  the  Woodger  Papers;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The 
Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/intelligent_machinery>.  Turing’s  draft 
typescript  of  the  Report  is  among  the  Turing  Papers  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College, 
Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  C  11);  there  is  a  digital  facsimile  at  <www.turingarchive.org>. 

53  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  appeared  in  1968  in  a  collection  of  essays  entitled  Key  Papers:  Cybernetics 
(London:  Butterworths),  ed.  C.  R.  Evans  and  A.  D.  J.  Robertson,  two  members  of  the  Autonomies  Division 
of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory.  The  following  year  another  edition  of ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  appeared  in 
the  volume  Machine  Intelligence  5  (ed.  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie,  Edinburgh  University  Press).  Unlike  the  1968 
and  1969  editions,  the  present  edition  follows  Turing’s  layout  and  his  numbering  of  headings.  Unfortunately 
the  1969  edition  (which  is  reproduced  in  Collected  Works  of  A.  M.  Turing:  Mechanical  Intelligence,  ed.  D.  C.  Ince 
(Amsterdam:  Elsevier,  1992))  contained  numerous  departures  from  Turing’s  own  wording,  as  well  as  typo¬ 
graphical  errors,  and  outright  mistakes.  To  mention  only  the  most  significant  of  these:  (1)  Turing’s  words 
‘determined  by  that  symbol’  on  p.  413,  below,  were  replaced  by  ‘described  by  that  symbol’;  (2)  Turing’s  words 
‘we  can  design  a  digital  computer  to  do  it,  but  that  we  stick  to  one,  say  the  ACE,  and  that’  on  p.  415  were 
omitted,  making  nonsense  of  Turing’s  statement;  (3)  the  words  ‘or  either  form  of  iii)’  on  p.  423  were  omitted; 
(4)  ‘Tl’  was  omitted  from  Turing’s  list  ‘U,  TO,  Tl,  DO  or  Dl’  on  p.  426;  (5)  the  phrase  ‘replacing  the  Us  of  the 
character  by  DO’  on  p.  428  was  incorrectly  rendered  ‘replacing  the  Os  of  the  character  by  DO’.  In  their 
introduction  to  the  1969  edition,  the  editors  state  that  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  was  ‘written  in  September 
1947’.  This  statement  has  caused  some  confusion  in  the  literature.  In  fact  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’  was  written  in 
the  summer  of  1948.  The  phrase  ‘Manchester  machine  (as  actually  working  8/7/48 )’  (p.  413  below)  appears  in 
both  the  finished  NPL  Report  and  Turing’s  draft  typescript.  In  the  1969  edition  Turing’s  date  ‘8/7/48’  (8  July 
1948)  has  been  rewritten  ‘8  August  1947’.  The  Manchester  machine  first  operated  on  21  June  1948. 


Intelligent  Machinery 

I  propose  to  investigate  the  question  as  to  whether  it  is  possible  for  machinery  to 
show  intelligent  behaviour.  It  is  usually  assumed  without  argument  that  it  is  not 
possible.  Common  catch  phrases  such  as  ‘acting  like  a  machine’,  ‘purely  mech¬ 
anical  behaviour’  reveal  this  common  attitude.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  such 
an  attitude  should  have  arisen.  Some  of  the  reasons  are: 

(a)  An  unwillingness  to  admit  the  possibility  that  mankind  can  have  any  rivals 
in  intellectual  power.  This  occurs  as  much  amongst  intellectual  people  as 
amongst  others:  they  have  more  to  lose.  Those  who  admit  the  possibility 
all  agree  that  its  realization  would  be  very  disagreeable.  The  same  situation 
arises  in  connection  with  the  possibility  of  our  being  superseded  by  some 
other  animal  species.  This  is  almost  as  disagreeable  and  its  theoretical 
possibility  is  indisputable. 

(b)  A  religious  belief  that  any  attempt  to  construct  such  machines  is  a  sort  of 
Promethean  irreverence. 

(c)  The  very  limited  character  of  the  machinery  which  has  been  used  until 
recent  times  (e.g.  up  to  1940).  This  encouraged  the  belief  that  machinery 
was  necessarily  limited  to  extremely  straightforward,  possibly  even  to  re¬ 
petitive,  jobs.  This  attitude  is  very  well  expressed  by  Dorothy  Sayers  ( The 
Mind  of  the  Maker,  p.  46)  ‘. . .  which  imagines  that  God,  having  created  his 
Universe,  has  now  screwed  the  cap  on  His  pen,  put  His  feet  on  the  mantel¬ 
piece  and  left  the  work  to  get  on  with  itself.’  This,  however,  rather  comes  into 
St.  Augustine’s  category  of  figures  of  speech  or  enigmatic  sayings  framed 
from  things  which  do  not  exist  at  all.  We  simply  do  not  know  of  any  creation 
which  goes  on  creating  itself  in  variety  when  the  creator  has  withdrawn 
from  it.  The  idea  is  that  God  simply  created  a  vast  machine  and  has  left  it 
working  until  it  runs  down  from  lack  of  fuel.  This  is  another  of  those 
obscure  analogies,  since  we  have  no  experience  of  machines  that  produce 
variety  of  their  own  accord;  the  nature  of  a  machine  is  to  do  the  same  thing 
over  and  over  again  so  long  as  it  keeps  going. 

(d)  Recently  the  theorem  of  Godel  and  related  results  (Godel,1  Church,2 
Turing3)  have  shown  that  if  one  tries  to  use  machines  for  such  purposes 
as  determining  the  truth  or  falsity  of  mathematical  theorems  and  one  is 
not  willing  to  tolerate  an  occasional  wrong  result,  then  any  given  machine 

Crown  copyright.  Reproduced  with  permission  of  the  Controller  of  HMSO,  the  National  Physical  Labora¬ 
tory,  and  the  Estate  of  Alan  Turing. 

1  K.  Godel,  ‘fiber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia  Mathematica  und  verwandter  Systeme  T, 
Monatshefte  fur  Mathematik  und  Physik,  38  (1931),  173-98. 

2  A.  Church,  ‘An  Unsolvable  Problem  of  Elementary  Number  Theory’,  American  Journal  of  Mathematics, 
58  (1936),  345-63. 

3  ‘On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an  Application  to  the  Entscheidungsproblem’  (Chapter  1). 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  411 


will  in  some  cases  be  unable  to  give  an  answer  at  all.  On  the  other  hand  the 
human  intelligence  seems  to  be  able  to  find  methods  of  ever  increasing 
power  for  dealing  with  such  problems  ‘transcending’  the  methods  available 
to  machines. 

(e)  In  so  far  as  a  machine  can  show  intelligence  this  is  to  be  regarded  as 
nothing  but  a  reflection  of  the  intelligence  of  its  creator. 


2.  Refutation  of  some  objections 

In  this  section  I  propose  to  outline  reasons  why  we  do  not  need  to  be  influenced 
by  the  above  described  objections.  The  objections  (a)  and  (b),  being  purely 
emotional,  do  not  really  need  to  be  refuted.  If  one  feels  it  necessary  to  refute 
them  there  is  little  to  be  said  that  could  hope  to  prevail,  though  the  actual 
production  of  the  machines  would  probably  have  some  effect.  In  so  far  then  as 
we  are  influenced  by  such  arguments  we  are  bound  to  be  left  feeling  rather 
uneasy  about  the  whole  project,  at  any  rate  for  the  present.  These  arguments 
cannot  be  wholly  ignored,  because  the  idea  of  ‘intelligence’  is  itself  emotional 
rather  than  mathematical. 

The  objection  (c)  in  its  crudest  form  is  refuted  at  once  by  the  actual  existence 
of  machinery  (ENIAC  etc.)  which  can  go  on  through  immense  numbers  (e.g. 
lO60’000  about  for  ACE)  of  operations  without  repetition,  assuming  no  break¬ 
down.  The  more  subtle  forms  of  this  objection  will  be  considered  at  length  in 
§  11  and  12. 

The  argument  from  Godel’s  and  other  theorems  (objection  (d) )  rests  essen¬ 
tially  on  the  condition  that  the  machine  must  not  make  mistakes.  But  this  is  not 
a  requirement  for  intelligence.  It  is  related  that  the  infant  Gauss  was  asked  at 
school  to  do  the  addition  15  +  18  +  21  +  . . .  +  54  (or  something  of  the  kind) 
and  that  he  immediately  wrote  down  483,  presumably  having  calculated  it  as 
(15  +  54)(54  —  12)/2.3.  One  can  imagine  circumstances  where  a  foolish  master 
told  the  child  that  he  ought  instead  to  have  added  18  to  15  obtaining  33,  then 
added  21  etc.  From  some  points  of  view  this  would  be  a  ‘mistake’,  in  spite  of  the 
obvious  intelligence  involved.  One  can  also  imagine  a  situation  where  the 
children  were  given  a  number  of  additions  to  do,  of  which  the  first  5  were  all 
arithmetic  progressions,  but  the  6th  was  say  23  +  34  +  45  +  . . .  +  100 
+  112  +  122  +  . . .  +  199.  Gauss  might  have  given  the  answer  to  this  as  if  it 
were  an  arithmetic  progression,  not  having  noticed  that  the  9th  term  was  112 
instead  of  111.  This  would  be  a  definite  mistake,  which  the  less  intelligent 
children  would  not  have  been  likely  to  make. 

The  view  (e)  that  intelligence  in  machinery  is  merely  a  reflection  of  that  of  its 
creator  is  rather  similar  to  the  view  that  the  credit  for  the  discoveries  of  a  pupil 
should  be  given  to  his  teacher.  In  such  a  case  the  teacher  would  be  pleased  with 


412  I  Alan  Turing 

the  success  of  his  methods  of  education,  but  would  not  claim  the  results 
themselves  unless  he  had  actually  communicated  them  to  his  pupil.  He  would 
certainly  have  envisaged  in  very  broad  outline  the  sort  of  thing  his  pupil  might  be 
expected  to  do,  but  would  not  expect  to  foresee  any  sort  of  detail.  It  is  already 
possible  to  produce  machines  where  this  sort  of  situation  arises  in  a  small  degree. 
One  can  produce  ‘paper  machines’  for  playing  chess.  Playing  against  such  a 
machine  gives  a  definite  feeling  that  one  is  pitting  one’s  wits  against  something 
alive. 

These  views  will  all  be  developed  more  completely  below. 


3.  Varieties  of  machinery 


It  will  not  be  possible  to  discuss  possible  means  of  producing  intelligent  ma¬ 
chinery  without  introducing  a  number  of  technical  terms  to  describe  different 
kinds  of  existent  machinery. 

‘Discrete  and  ‘ Continuous ’  machinery.  We  may  call  a  machine  ‘discrete’  when  it 
is  natural  to  describe  its  possible  states  as  a  discrete  set,  the  motion  of  the 
machine  occurring  by  jumping  from  one  state  to  another.  The  states  of  ‘continu¬ 
ous’  machinery  on  the  other  hand  form  a  continuous  manifold,  and  the  behav¬ 
iour  of  the  machine  is  described  by  a  curve  on  this  manifold.  All  machinery  can 
be  regarded  as  continuous,  but  when  it  is  possible  to  regard  it  as  discrete  it  is 
usually  best  to  do  so.  The  states  of  discrete  machinery  will  be  described  as 
‘configurations’. 

‘ Controlling ’  and  ‘ Active ’  machinery.  Machinery  may  be  described  as  ‘control¬ 
ling’  if  it  only  deals  with  information.  In  practice  this  condition  is  much  the  same 
as  saying  that  the  magnitude  of  the  machine’s  effects  may  be  as  small  as  we 
please,  so  long  as  we  do  not  introduce  confusion  through  Brownian  movement 
etc.  ‘Active’  machinery  is  intended  to  produce  some  definite  physical  effect. 


Examples  A  Bulldozer  is 
A  Telephone  is 
A  Brunsviga4  is 
A  Brain  is  probably 

The  ENIAC,  ACE  etc. 
A  Differential  Analyser 


Continuous  Active 
Continuous  Controlling 
Discrete  Controlling 
Continuous  Controlling,  but  is  very 
similar  to  much  discrete  machinery 
Discrete  Controlling 
Continuous  Controlling 


We  shall  mainly  be  concerned  with  discrete  controlling  machinery.  As  we  have 
mentioned,  brains  very  nearly  fall  into  this  class,  and  there  seems  every  reason  to 
believe  that  they  could  have  been  made  to  fall  genuinely  into  it  without  any 
change  in  their  essential  properties.  However,  the  property  of  being  ‘discrete’  is 


4  Editor’s  note.  The  Brunsviga  was  a  popular  desk  calculating  machine. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  413 


only  an  advantage  for  the  theoretical  investigator,  and  serves  no  evolutionary 
purpose,  so  we  could  not  expect  Nature  to  assist  us  by  producing  truly  ‘discrete’ 
brains. 

Given  any  discrete  machine  the  first  thing  we  wish  to  find  out  about  it  is  the 
number  of  states  (configurations)  it  can  have.  This  number  may  be  infinite  (but 
enumerable)  in  which  case  we  say  that  the  machine  has  infinite  memory  (or 
storage)  capacity.  If  the  machine  has  a  finite  number  N  of  possible  states  then  we 
say  that  it  has  a  memory  capacity  of  (or  equivalent  to)  log,  N  binary  digits. 
According  to  this  definition  we  have  the  following  table  of  capacities,  very  roughly 

Brunsviga  90 

ENIAC  without  cards  and  with  fixed  programme  600 

ENIAC  with  cards  oo5 

ACE  as  proposed  60,000 

Manchester  machine  (as  actually  working  8/7/48)  1,100 

The  memory  capacity  of  a  machine  more  than  anything  else  determines  the 
complexity  of  its  possible  behaviour. 

The  behaviour  of  a  discrete  machine  is  completely  described  when  we  are 
given  the  state  (configuration)  of  the  machine  as  a  function  of  the  immediately 
preceding  state  and  the  relevant  external  data. 

Logical  Computing  Machines  (L.C.M.s) 

In  [Chapter  1]  a  certain  type  of  discrete  machine  was  described.  It  had  an  infinite 
memory  capacity  obtained  in  the  form  of  an  infinite  tape  marked  out  into 
squares  on  each  of  which  a  symbol  could  be  printed.  At  any  moment  there  is 
one  symbol  in  the  machine;  it  is  called  the  scanned  symbol.  The  machine  can 
alter  the  scanned  symbol  and  its  behaviour  is  in  part  determined  by  that  symbol, 
but  the  symbols  on  the  tape  elsewhere  do  not  affect  the  behaviour  of  the 
machine.  However  the  tape  can  be  moved  back  and  forth  through  the  machine, 
this  being  one  of  the  elementary  operations  of  the  machine.  Any  symbol  on  the 
tape  may  therefore  eventually  have  an  innings. 

These  machines  will  here  be  called  ‘Logical  Computing  Machines’.  They  are 
chiefly  of  interest  when  we  wish  to  consider  what  a  machine  could  in  principle  be 
designed  to  do,  when  we  are  willing  to  allow  it  both  unlimited  time  and 
unlimited  storage  capacity. 

Universal  Logical  Computing  Machines.  It  is  possible  to  describe  L.C.M.s  in  a 
very  standard  way,  and  to  put  the  description  into  a  form  which  can  be 
‘understood’  (i.e.  applied  by)  a  special  machine.  In  particular  it  is  possible  to 
design  a  ‘universal  machine’  which  is  an  L.C.M.  such  that  if  the  standard 


5  Editor’s  note.  The  symbol  ‘oo’  is  omitted  from  the  original  1948  NPL  Report  and  from  the  1968  and 
1969  editions.  It  is  present  in  Turing’s  draft  typescript. 


414  I  Alan  Turing 


description  of  some  other  L.C.M.  is  imposed  on  the  otherwise  blank  tape  from 
outside,  and  the  (universal)  machine  then  set  going  it  will  carry  out  the  oper¬ 
ations  of  the  particular  machine  whose  description  it  was  given.  For  details  the 
reader  must  refer  to  [Chapter  1], 

The  importance  of  the  universal  machine  is  clear.  We  do  not  need  to  have  an 
infinity  of  different  machines  doing  different  jobs.  A  single  one  will  suffice.  The 
engineering  problem  of  producing  various  machines  for  various  jobs  is  replaced 
by  the  office  work  of  ‘programming’  the  universal  machine  to  do  these  jobs. 

It  is  found  in  practice  that  L.C.M. s  can  do  anything  that  could  be  described  as 
‘rule  of  thumb’  or  ‘purely  mechanical’.  This  is  sufficiently  well  established  that  it 
is  now  agreed  amongst  logicians  that  ‘calculable  by  means  of  an  L.C.M.’  is  the 
correct  accurate  rendering  of  such  phrases.  There  are  several  mathematically 
equivalent  but  superficially  very  different  renderings. 

Practical  Computing  Machines  (P.C.M.s) 

Although  the  operations  which  can  be  performed  by  L.C.M. s  include  every  rule 
of  thumb  process,  the  number  of  steps  involved  tends  to  be  enormous.  This  is 
mainly  due  to  the  arrangement  of  the  memory  along  the  tape.  Two  facts  which 
need  to  be  used  together  may  be  stored  very  far  apart  on  the  tape.  There  is  also 
rather  little  encouragement,  when  dealing  with  these  machines,  to  condense  the 
stored  expressions  at  all.  For  instance  the  number  of  symbols  required  in  order  to 
express  a  number  in  Arabic  form  (e.g.  149056)  cannot  be  given  any  definite 
bound,  any  more  than  if  the  numbers  are  expressed  in  the  ‘simplified  Roman’ 
form  (IIIII ...  I,  with  149056  occurrences  of  I).  As  the  simplified  Roman  system 
obeys  very  much  simpler  laws  one  uses  it  instead  of  the  Arabic  system. 

In  practice  however  one  can  assign  finite  bounds  to  the  numbers  that  one  will 
deal  with.  For  instance  we  can  assign  a  bound  to  the  number  of  steps  that  we  will 
admit  in  a  calculation  performed  with  a  real  machine  in  the  following  sort  of 
way.  Suppose  that  the  storage  system  depends  on  charging  condensers  of  cap¬ 
acity  C  =  1  /if,6 7  and  that  we  use  two  states  of  charging,  E  =  100  volts  and 
— E  =  —100  volts.  When  we  wish  to  use  the  information  carried  by  the  con¬ 
denser  we  have  to  observe  its  voltage.  Owing  to  thermal  agitation  the  voltage 
observed  will  always  be  slightly  wrong,  and  the  probability  of  an  error  between  V 
and  V  —  dV  volts  is 

V  7 rC 

where  k  is  Boltzmann’s  constant.  Taking  the  values  suggested  we  find  that  the 
probability  of  reading  the  sign  of  the  voltage  wrong  is  about  io_1'2xl°16.  If  then  a 


6  Editor’s  note.  |xf  =  micro-farad. 

7  Editor’s  note.  This  formula  is  taken  from  Turing’s  draft  typescript. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  415 


job  took  more  than  lO10*7  steps  we  should  be  virtually  certain  of  getting  the 
wrong  answer,  and  we  may  therefore  restrict  ourselves  to  jobs  with  fewer  steps. 
Even  a  bound  of  this  order  might  have  useful  simplifying  effects.  More  practical 
bounds  are  obtained  by  assuming  that  a  light  wave  must  travel  at  least  1  cm 
between  steps  (this  would  only  be  false  with  a  very  small  machine)  and  that  we 
could  not  wait  more  than  100  years  for  an  answer.  This  would  give  a  limit  of  1020 
steps.  The  storage  capacity  will  probably  have  a  rather  similar  bound,  so  that  we 
could  use  sequences  of  20  decimal  digits  for  describing  the  position  in  which 
a  given  piece  of  data  was  to  be  found,  and  this  would  be  a  really  valuable 
possibility. 

Machines  of  the  type  generally  known  as  ‘Automatic  Digital  Computing 
Machines’  often  make  great  use  of  this  possibility.  They  also  usually  put  a  great 
deal  of  their  stored  information  in  a  form  very  different  from  the  tape  form.  By 
means  of  a  system  rather  reminiscent  of  a  telephone  exchange  it  is  made  possible 
to  obtain  a  piece  of  information  almost  immediately  by  ‘dialling’  the  position 
of  this  information  in  the  store.  The  delay  may  be  only  a  few  microseconds 
with  some  systems.  Such  machines  will  be  described  as  ‘Practical  Computing 
Machines’. 

Universal  Practical  Computing  Machines 

Nearly  all  of  the  P.C.M.s  now  under  construction  have  the  essential  properties  of 
the  ‘Universal  Logical  Computing’  machines  mentioned  earlier.  In  practice,  given 
any  job  which  could  have  been  done  on  an  L.C.M.  one  can  also  do  it  on  one  of 
these  digital  computers.  I  do  not  mean  that  we  can  design  a  digital  computer  to 
do  it,  but  that  we  stick  to  one,  say  the  ACE,  and  that  we  can  do  any  required  job 
of  the  type  mentioned  on  it,  by  suitable  programming.  The  programming  is  pure 
paper  work.  It  naturally  occurs  to  one  to  ask  whether  e.g.  the  ACE  would  be  truly 
universal  if  its  memory  capacity  were  infinitely  extended.  I  have  investigated  this 
question,  and  the  answer  appears  to  be  as  follows,  though  I  have  not  proved  any 
formal  mathematical  theorem  about  it.  As  has  been  explained,  the  ACE  at 
present  uses  finite  sequences  of  digits  to  describe  positions  in  its  memory:  they 
are  (Sept  1947)  actually  sequences  of  9  binary  digits.  The  ACE  also  works  largely 
for  other  purposes  with  sequences  of  32  binary  digits.  If  the  memory  were 
extended  e.g.  to  1000  times  its  present  capacity  it  would  be  natural  to  arrange 
the  memory  in  blocks  of  nearly  the  maximum  capacity  which  can  be  handled 
with  the  9  digits,  and  from  time  to  time  to  switch  from  block  to  block.  A 
relatively  small  part  would  never  be  switched.  This  would  contain  some  of  the 
more  fundamental  instruction  tables  and  those  concerned  with  switching.  This 
part  might  be  called  the  ‘central  part’.  One  would  then  need  to  have  a  number 
which  described  which  block  was  in  action  at  any  moment.  This  number  might 
however  be  as  large  as  one  pleased.  Eventually  the  point  would  be  reached  where 
it  could  not  be  stored  in  a  word  (32  digits),  or  even  in  the  central  part.  One 


416  I  Alan  Turing 


would  then  have  to  set  aside  a  block  for  storing  the  number,  or  even  a  sequence 
of  blocks,  say  blocks  1,  2, ...  n.  We  should  then  have  to  store  «,  and  in  theory  it 
would  be  of  indefinite  size.  This  sort  of  process  can  be  extended  in  all  sorts  of 
ways,  but  we  shall  always  be  left  with  a  positive  integer  which  is  of  indefinite  size 
and  which  needs  to  be  stored  somewhere,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  way  out  of 
the  difficulty  but  to  introduce  a  ‘tape’.  But  once  this  has  been  done,  and  since  we 
are  only  trying  to  prove  a  theoretical  result,  one  might  as  well,  whilst  proving  the 
theorem,  ignore  all  the  other  forms  of  storage.  One  will  in  fact  have  a  U.L.C.M. 
with  some  complications.  This  in  effect  means  that  one  will  not  be  able  to  prove 
any  result  of  the  required  kind  which  gives  any  intellectual  satisfaction. 

Paper  machines 

It  is  possible  to  produce  the  effect  of  a  computing  machine  by  writing  down  a 
set  of  rules  of  procedure  and  asking  a  man  to  carry  them  out.  Such  a  combin¬ 
ation  of  a  man  with  written  instructions  will  be  called  a  ‘Paper  Machine’.  A  man 
provided  with  paper,  pencil,  and  rubber,  and  subject  to  strict  discipline,  is  in 
effect  a  universal  machine.  The  expression  ‘paper  machine’  will  often  be  used 
below. 

Partially  random  and  apparently  partially  random  machines 
It  is  possible  to  modify  the  above  described  types  of  discrete  machines  by 
allowing  several  alternative  operations  to  be  applied  at  some  points,  the  alterna¬ 
tives  to  be  chosen  by  a  random  process.  Such  a  machine  will  be  described  as 
‘partially  random’.  If  we  wish  to  say  definitely  that  a  machine  is  not  of  this  kind 
we  will  describe  it  as  ‘determined’.  Sometimes  a  machine  may  be  strictly  speaking 
determined  but  appear  superficially  as  if  it  were  partially  random.  This  would 
occur  if  for  instance  the  digits  of  the  number  n  were  used  to  determine  the 
choices  of  a  partially  random  machine,  where  previously  a  dice  thrower  or 
electronic  equivalent  had  been  used.  These  machines  are  known  as  apparently 
partially  random. 

4.  Unorganised  machines 

So  far  we  have  been  considering  machines  which  are  designed  for  a  definite 
purpose  (though  the  universal  machines  are  in  a  sense  an  exception).  We  might 
instead  consider  what  happens  when  we  make  up  a  machine  in  a  comparatively 
unsystematic  way  from  some  kind  of  standard  components.  We  could  consider 
some  particular  machine  of  this  nature  and  find  out  what  sort  of  things  it  is  likely 
to  do.  Machines  which  are  largely  random  in  their  construction  in  this  way  will 
be  called  ‘unorganised  machines’.  This  does  not  pretend  to  be  an  accurate  term. 
It  is  conceivable  that  the  same  machine  might  be  regarded  by  one  man  as 
organised  and  by  another  as  unorganised. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  417 


A  typical  example  of  an  unorganised  machine  would  be  as  follows.  The  machine 
is  made  up  from  a  rather  large  number  N  of  similar  units.  Each  unit  has  two  input 
terminals,  and  has  an  output  terminal  which  can  be  connected  to  the  input 
terminals  of  (0  or  more)  other  units.  We  may  imagine  that  for  each  integer 
r,  1  =£  r  =£  N,  two  numbers  i(r)  and  j(r)  are  chosen  at  random  from  1 ...  AT  and 
that  we  connect  the  inputs  of  unit  rto  the  outputs  of  units  i(r)  and  j(r).  All  of  the 
units  are  connected  to  a  central  synchronising  unit  from  which  synchronising 
pulses  are  emitted  at  more  or  less  equal  intervals  of  time.  The  times  when  these 
pulses  arrive  will  be  called  ‘moments’.  Each  unit  is  capable  of  having  two  states  at 
each  moment.  These  states  may  be  called  0  and  1 .  The  state  is  determined  by  the 
rule  that  the  states  of  the  units  from  which  the  input  leads  come  are  to  be  taken  at 
the  previous  moment,  multiplied  together  and  the  result  subtracted  from  1.  An 
unorganised  machine  of  this  character  is  shown  in  the  diagram  below. 


A  sequence  of  six  possible  consecutive  conditions  for  the  whole  machine  is: 

1110  0  10 
2  1110  10 

3  0  11111 

4  0  10  10  1 

5  10  10  10 

The  behaviour  of  a  machine  with  so  few  units  is  naturally  very  trivial.  However, 
machines  of  this  character  can  behave  in  a  very  complicated  manner  when  the 
number  of  units  is  large.  We  may  call  these  A-type  unorganised  machines.  Thus 
the  machine  in  the  diagram  is  an  A-type  unorganised  machine  of  5  units.  The 
motion  of  an  A-type  machine  with  N  units  is  of  course  eventually  periodic,  as  is 
any  determined  machine  with  finite  memory  capacity.  The  period  cannot  exceed 
2n  moments,  nor  can  the  length  of  time  before  the  periodic  motion  begins.  In 


418  I  Alan  Turing 


the  example  above  the  period  is  2  moments  and  there  are  3  moments  before  the 
periodic  motion  begins.  2N  is  32. 

The  A-type  unorganised  machines  are  of  interest  as  being  about  the  simplest 
model  of  a  nervous  system  with  a  random  arrangement  of  neurons.  It  would 
therefore  be  of  very  great  interest  to  find  out  something  about  their  behaviour. 
A  second  type  of  unorganised  machine  will  now  be  described,  not  because  it  is  of 
any  great  intrinsic  importance,  but  because  it  will  be  useful  later  for  illustrative 
purposes.  Let  us  denote  the  circuit 


by 


Figure  10.2. 


HU 


as  an  abbreviation.  Then  for  each  A-type  unorganised  machine  we  can  construct 
another  machine  by  replacing  each  connection  — ►—  in  it  by  — Q — ►.  The 
resulting  machines  will  be  called  B-type  unorganised  machines.  It  may  be  said 
that  the  B-type  machines  are  all  A-type.  To  this  I  would  reply  that  the  above 
definitions  if  correctly  (but  drily!)  set  out  would  take  the  form  of  describing  the 
probability  of  an  A-  (or  B-)  type  machine  belonging  to  a  given  set;  it  is  not 
merely  a  definition  of  which  are  the  A-type  machines  and  which  are  the  B-type 
machines.  If  one  chooses  an  A-type  machine,  with  a  given  number  of  units,  at 
random,  it  will  be  extremely  unlikely  that  one  will  get  a  B-type  machine. 

It  is  easily  seen  that  the  connection  — *—□ — ►  can  have  three  conditions. 
It  may  i)  pass  all  signals  through  with  interchange  of  0  and  1,  or  ii)  it  may 
convert  all  signals  into  1,  or  again  iii)  it  may  act  as  in  i)  and  ii)  in  alternate 
moments.  (Alternative  iii)  has  two  sub-cases.)  Which  of  these  cases  applies 
depends  on  the  initial  conditions.  There  is  a  delay  of  two  moments  in  going 
through  — *HZI — 


5.  Interference  with  machinery.  Modifiable  and 
self-modifying  machinery 

The  types  of  machine  that  we  have  considered  so  far  are  mainly  ones  that  are 
allowed  to  continue  in  their  own  way  for  indefinite  periods  without  interference 
from  outside.  The  universal  machines  were  an  exception  to  this,  in  that  from 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  419 


time  to  time  one  might  change  the  description  of  the  machine  which  is  being 
imitated.  We  shall  now  consider  machines  in  which  such  interference  is  the  rule 
rather  than  the  exception. 

We  may  distinguish  two  kinds  of  interference.  There  is  the  extreme  form 
in  which  parts  of  the  machine  are  removed  and  replaced  by  others.  This 
may  be  described  as  ‘screwdriver  interference’.  At  the  other  end  of  the  scale 
is  ‘paper  interference’,  which  consists  in  the  mere  communication  of  information 
to  the  machine,  which  alters  its  behaviour.  In  view  of  the  properties  of 
the  universal  machine  we  do  not  need  to  consider  the  difference  between 
these  two  kinds  of  machine  as  being  so  very  radical  after  all.  Paper  interference 
when  applied  to  the  universal  machine  can  be  as  useful  as  screwdriver  inter¬ 
ference. 

We  shall  mainly  be  interested  in  paper  interference.  Since  screwdriver  interfer¬ 
ence  can  produce  a  completely  new  machine  without  difficulty  there  is  rather 
little  to  be  said  about  it.  In  future  ‘interference’  will  normally  mean  ‘paper 
interference’. 

When  it  is  possible  to  alter  the  behaviour  of  a  machine  very  radically  we  may 
speak  of  the  machine  as  being  ‘modifiable’.  This  is  a  relative  term.  One  machine 
may  be  spoken  of  as  being  more  modifiable  than  another. 

One  may  also  sometimes  speak  of  a  machine  modifying  itself,  or  of  a  machine 
changing  its  own  instructions.  This  is  really  a  nonsensical  form  of  phraseology, 
but  is  convenient.  Of  course,  according  to  our  conventions  the  ‘machine’  is 
completely  described  by  the  relation  between  its  possible  configurations  at  con¬ 
secutive  moments.  It  is  an  abstraction  which  by  the  form  of  its  definition  cannot 
change  in  time.  If  we  consider  the  machine  as  starting  in  a  particular  configura¬ 
tion,  however,  we  may  be  tempted  to  ignore  those  configurations  which  cannot 
be  reached  without  interference  from  it.  If  we  do  this  we  should  get  a  ‘successor 
relation’  for  the  configurations  with  different  properties  from  the  original  one 
and  so  a  different  ‘machine’. 

If  we  now  consider  interference,  we  should  say  that  each  time  interference 
occurs  the  machine  is  probably  changed.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  interference 
‘modifies’  a  machine.  The  sense  in  which  a  machine  can  modify  itself  is  even 
more  remote.  We  may  if  we  wish  divide  the  operations  of  the  machine  into  two 
classes,  normal  and  self-modifying  operations.  So  long  as  only  normal  oper¬ 
ations  are  performed  we  regard  the  machine  as  unaltered.  Clearly  the  idea  of 
‘self-modification’  will  not  be  of  much  interest  except  where  the  division  of 
operations  into  the  two  classes  is  very  carefully  made.  The  sort  of  case  I  have  in 
mind  is  a  computing  machine  like  the  ACE  where  large  parts  of  the  storage  are 
normally  occupied  in  holding  instruction  tables.  (Instruction  tables  are  the 
equivalent  in  U.P.C.M.s  of  descriptions  of  machines  in  U.L.C.M.s).  Whenever 
the  content  of  this  storage  was  altered  by  the  internal  operations  of  the  machine, 
one  would  naturally  speak  of  the  machine  ‘modifying  itself’. 


420  I  Alan  Turing 


6.  Man  as  a  machine 

A  great  positive  reason  for  believing  in  the  possibility  of  making  thinking  machin¬ 
ery  is  the  fact  that  it  is  possible  to  make  machinery  to  imitate  any  small  part  of  a 
man.  That  the  microphone  does  this  for  the  ear,  and  the  television  camera  for  the 
eye,  are  commonplaces.  One  can  also  produce  remote  controlled  Robots  whose 
limbs  balance  the  body  with  the  aid  of  servo-mechanisms.  Here  we  are  chiefly 
interested  in  the  nervous  system.  We  could  produce  fairly  accurate  electrical 
models  to  copy  the  behaviour  of  nerves,  but  there  seems  very  little  point  in 
doing  so.  It  would  be  rather  like  putting  a  lot  of  work  into  cars  which  walked  on 
legs  instead  of  continuing  to  use  wheels.  The  electrical  circuits  which  are  used  in 
electronic  computing  machinery  seem  to  have  the  essential  properties  of  nerves. 
They  are  able  to  transmit  information  from  place  to  place,  and  also  to  store  it. 
Certainly  the  nerve  has  many  advantages.  It  is  extremely  compact,  does  not  wear 
out  (probably  for  hundreds  of  years  if  kept  in  a  suitable  medium!)  and  has  a  very 
low  energy  consumption.  Against  these  advantages  the  electronic  circuits  have 
only  one  counter  attraction,  that  of  speed.  This  advantage  is  however  on  such  a 
scale  that  it  may  possibly  outweigh  the  advantages  of  the  nerve. 

One  way  of  setting  about  our  task  of  building  a  ‘thinking  machine’  would  be 
to  take  a  man  as  a  whole  and  to  try  to  replace  all  the  parts  of  him  by  machinery. 
He  would  include  television  cameras,  microphones,  loudspeakers,  wheels  and 
‘handling  servo-mechanisms’  as  well  as  some  sort  of  ‘electronic  brain’.  This 
would  of  course  be  a  tremendous  undertaking.  The  object  if  produced  by  present 
techniques  would  be  of  immense  size,  even  if  the  ‘brain’  part  were  stationary  and 
controlled  the  body  from  a  distance.  In  order  that  the  machine  should  have  a 
chance  of  finding  things  out  for  itself  it  should  be  allowed  to  roam  the  country¬ 
side,  and  the  danger  to  the  ordinary  citizen  would  be  serious.  Moreover  even 
when  the  facilities  mentioned  above  were  provided,  the  creature  would  still  have 
no  contact  with  food,  sex,  sport  and  many  other  things  of  interest  to  the  human 
being.  Thus  although  this  method  is  probably  the  ‘sure’  way  of  producing  a 
thinking  machine  it  seems  to  be  altogether  too  slow  and  impracticable. 

Instead  we  propose  to  try  and  see  what  can  be  done  with  a  ‘brain’  which  is 
more  or  less  without  a  body,  providing  at  most  organs  of  sight,  speech  and 
hearing.  We  are  then  faced  with  the  problem  of  finding  suitable  branches  of 
thought  for  the  machine  to  exercise  its  powers  in.  The  following  fields  appear  to 
me  to  have  advantages: 

(i)  Various  games  e.g.  chess,  noughts  and  crosses,  bridge,  poker 

(ii)  The  learning  of  languages 

(iii)  Translation  of  languages 

(iv)  Cryptography 

(v)  Mathematics. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  421 


Of  these  (i),  (iv),  and  to  a  lesser  extent  (iii)  and  (v)  are  good  in  that  they  require 
little  contact  with  the  outside  world.  For  instance  in  order  that  the  machine 
should  be  able  to  play  chess  its  only  organs  need  be  ‘eyes’  capable  of  distinguish¬ 
ing  the  various  positions  on  a  specially  made  board,  and  means  for  announcing 
its  own  moves.  Mathematics  should  preferably  be  restricted  to  branches  where 
diagrams  are  not  much  used.  Of  the  above  possible  fields  the  learning  of 
languages  would  be  the  most  impressive,  since  it  is  the  most  human  of  these 
activities.  This  field  seems  however  to  depend  rather  too  much  on  sense  organs 
and  locomotion  to  be  feasible. 

The  field  of  cryptography  will  perhaps  be  the  most  rewarding.  There  is  a 
remarkably  close  parallel  between  the  problems  of  the  physicist  and  those  of  the 
cryptographer.  The  system  on  which  a  message  is  enciphered  corresponds  to  the 
laws  of  the  universe,  the  intercepted  messages  to  the  evidence  available,  the  keys 
for  a  day  or  a  message  to  important  constants  which  have  to  be  determined.  The 
correspondence  is  very  close,  but  the  subject  matter  of  cryptography  is  very  easily 
dealt  with  by  discrete  machinery,  physics  not  so  easily. 


7.  Education  of  machinery 

Although  we  have  abandoned  the  plan  to  make  a  ‘whole  man’,  we  should  be  wise 
to  sometimes  compare  the  circumstances  of  our  machine  with  those  of  a  man.  It 
would  be  quite  unfair  to  expect  a  machine  straight  from  the  factory  to  compete 
on  equal  terms  with  a  university  graduate.  The  graduate  has  had  contact  with 
human  beings  for  twenty  years  or  more.  This  contact  has  throughout  that  period 
been  modifying  his  behaviour  pattern.  His  teachers  have  been  intentionally 
trying  to  modify  it.  At  the  end  of  the  period  a  large  number  of  standard  routines 
will  have  been  superimposed  on  the  original  pattern  of  his  brain.  These  routines 
will  be  known  to  the  community  as  a  whole.  He  is  then  in  a  position  to  try  out 
new  combinations  of  these  routines,  to  make  slight  variations  on  them,  and  to 
apply  them  in  new  ways. 

We  may  say  then  that  in  so  far  as  a  man  is  a  machine  he  is  one  that  is  subject  to  very 
much  interference.  In  fact  interference  will  be  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception.  He 
is  in  frequent  communication  with  other  men,  and  is  continually  receiving  visual 
and  other  stimuli  which  themselves  constitute  a  form  of  interference.  It  will  only  be 
when  the  man  is  ‘concentrating’  with  a  view  to  eliminating  these  stimuli  or 
‘distractions’  that  he  approximates  a  machine  without  interference. 

We  are  chiefly  interested  in  machines  with  comparatively  little  interference,  for 
reasons  given  in  the  last  section,  but  it  is  important  to  remember  that  although  a 
man  when  concentrating  may  behave  like  a  machine  without  interference,  his 
behaviour  when  concentrating  is  largely  determined  by  the  way  he  has  been 
conditioned  by  previous  interference. 


422  I  Alan  Turing 


If  we  are  trying  to  produce  an  intelligent  machine,  and  are  following  the  human 
model  as  closely  as  we  can,  we  should  begin  with  a  machine  with  very  little  capacity 
to  carry  out  elaborate  operations  or  to  react  in  a  disciplined  manner  to  orders 
(taking  the  form  of  interference).  Then  by  applying  appropriate  interference, 
mimicking  education,  we  should  hope  to  modify  the  machine  until  it  could  be 
relied  on  to  produce  definite  reactions  to  certain  commands.  This  would  be  the 
beginning  of  the  process.  I  will  not  attempt  to  follow  it  further  now. 


8.  Organising  unorganised  machinery 

Many  unorganised  machines  have  configurations  such  that  if  once  that  con¬ 
figuration  is  reached,  and  if  the  interference  thereafter  is  appropriately  restricted, 
the  machine  behaves  as  one  organised  for  some  definite  purpose.  For  instance 
the  B-type  machine  shown  below  was  chosen  at  random. 


If  the  connections  numbered  1,  3,  6,  4  are  in  condition  ii)  initially  and  connec¬ 
tions  2,  5,  7  are  in  condition  i),  then  the  machine  may  be  considered  to  be  one 
for  the  purpose  of  passing  on  signals  with  a  delay  of  4  moments.  This  is  a 
particular  case  of  a  very  general  property  of  B-type  machines  (and  many  other 
types),  viz.  that  with  suitable  initial  conditions  they  will  do  any  required  job, 
given  sufficient  time  and  provided  the  number  of  units  is  sufficient.  In  particular 
with  a  B-type  unorganised  machine  with  sufficient  units  one  can  find  initial 
conditions  which  will  make  it  into  a  universal  machine  with  a  given  storage 
capacity.  (A  formal  proof  to  this  effect  might  be  of  some  interest,  or  even  a 
demonstration  of  it  starting  with  a  particular  unorganised  B-type  machine,  but  I 
am  not  giving  it  as  it  lies  rather  too  far  outside  the  main  argument.) 

With  these  B-type  machines  the  possibility  of  interference  which  could  set  in 
appropriate  initial  conditions  has  not  been  arranged  for.  It  is  however  not 
difficult  to  think  of  appropriate  methods  by  which  this  could  be  done.  For 
instance  instead  of  the  connection 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  423 


one  might  use 


Figure  10.4. 


Figure  10.5. 

Here  A,  B  are  interfering  inputs,  normally  giving  the  signal  ‘1’.  By  supplying 
appropriate  other  signals  at  A,  B  we  can  get  the  connection  into  condition  i)  or 
ii)  or  either  form  of  iii),  as  desired.  However,  this  requires  two  special  interfering 
inputs  for  each  connection. 

We  shall  be  mainly  interested  in  cases  where  there  are  only  quite  few  inde¬ 
pendent  inputs  altogether,  so  that  all  the  interference  which  sets  up  the  ‘initial 
conditions’  of  the  machine  has  to  be  provided  through  one  or  two  inputs.  The 
process  of  setting  up  these  initial  conditions  so  that  the  machine  will  carry  out 
some  particular  useful  task  may  be  called  ‘organising  the  machine’.  ‘Organising’ 
is  thus  a  form  of  ‘modification’. 


9.  The  cortex  as  an  unorganised  machine 

Many  parts  of  a  man’s  brain  are  definite  nerve  circuits  required  for  quite  definite 
purposes.  Examples  of  these  are  the  ‘centres’  which  control  respiration,  sneezing, 
following  moving  objects  with  the  eyes,  etc.:  all  the  reflexes  proper  (not  ‘condi¬ 
tioned’)  are  due  to  the  activities  of  these  definite  structures  in  the  brain.  Likewise 
the  apparatus  for  the  more  elementary  analysis  of  shapes  and  sounds  probably 
comes  into  this  category.  But  the  more  intellectual  activities  of  the  brain  are  too 


424  I  Alan  Turing 


varied  to  be  managed  on  this  basis.  The  difference  between  the  languages  spoken 
on  the  two  sides  of  the  Channel  is  not  due  to  differences  in  development  of  the 
French-speaking  and  English-speaking  parts  of  the  brain.  It  is  due  to  the  linguis¬ 
tic  parts  having  been  subjected  to  different  training.  We  believe  then  that  there 
are  large  parts  of  the  brain,  chiefly  in  the  cortex,  whose  function  is  largely 
indeterminate.  In  the  infant  these  parts  do  not  have  much  effect:  the  effect 
they  have  is  uncoordinated.  In  the  adult  they  have  great  and  purposive  effect: 
the  form  of  this  effect  depends  on  the  training  in  childhood.  A  large  remnant  of 
the  random  behaviour  of  infancy  remains  in  the  adult. 

All  of  this  suggests  that  the  cortex  of  the  infant  is  an  unorganised  machine,  which 
can  be  organised  by  suitable  interfering  training.  The  organising  might  result  in  the 
modification  of  the  machine  into  a  universal  machine  or  something  like  it.  This 
would  mean  that  the  adult  will  obey  orders  given  in  appropriate  language,  even  if 
they  were  very  complicated;  he  would  have  no  common  sense,  and  would  obey  the 
most  ridiculous  orders  unflinchingly.  When  all  his  orders  had  been  fulfilled  he 
would  sink  into  a  comatose  state  or  perhaps  obey  some  standing  order,  such  as 
eating.  Creatures  not  unlike  this  can  really  be  found,  but  most  people  behave  quite 
differently  under  many  circumstances.  However  the  resemblance  to  a  universal 
machine  is  still  very  great,  and  suggests  to  us  that  the  step  from  the  unorganised 
infant  to  a  universal  machine  is  one  which  should  be  understood.  When  this  has 
been  mastered  we  shall  be  in  a  far  better  position  to  consider  how  the  organising 
process  might  have  been  modified  to  produce  a  more  normal  type  of  mind. 

This  picture  of  the  cortex  as  an  unorganised  machine  is  very  satisfactory  from 
the  point  of  view  of  evolution  and  genetics.  It  clearly  would  not  require  any  very 
complex  system  of  genes  to  produce  something  like  the  A-  or  B-type  unorganised 
machine.  In  fact  this  should  be  much  easier  than  the  production  of  such  things  as 
the  respiratory  centre.  This  might  suggest  that  intelligent  races  could  be  pro¬ 
duced  comparatively  easily.  I  think  this  is  wrong  because  the  possession  of  a 
human  cortex  (say)  would  be  virtually  useless  if  no  attempt  was  made  to  organise 
it.  Thus  if  a  wolf  by  a  mutation  acquired  a  human  cortex  there  is  little  reason  to 
believe  that  he  would  have  any  selective  advantage.  If  however  the  mutation 
occurred  in  a  milieu  where  speech  had  developed  (parrot-like  wolves),  and  if  the 
mutation  by  chance  had  well  permeated  a  small  community,  then  some  selective 
advantage  might  be  felt.  It  would  then  be  possible  to  pass  information  on  from 
generation  to  generation.  However  this  is  all  rather  speculative. 


10.  Experiments  in  organising.  Pleasure-pain  systems 

It  is  interesting  to  experiment  with  unorganised  machines  admitting  definite 
types  of  interference  and  trying  to  organize  them,  e.g.  to  modify  them  into 
universal  machines. 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  425 


The  organisation  of  a  machine  into  a  universal  machine  would  be  most 
impressive  if  the  arrangements  of  interference  involve  very  few  inputs.  The 
training  of  the  human  child  depends  largely  on  a  system  of  rewards  and  punish¬ 
ments,  and  this  suggests  that  it  ought  to  be  possible  to  carry  through  the 
organising  with  only  two  interfering  inputs,  one  for  ‘pleasure’  or  ‘reward’  (R) 
and  the  other  for  ‘pain’  or  ‘punishment’  (P).  One  can  devise  a  large  number  of 
such  ‘pleasure-pain’  systems.  I  will  use  this  term  to  mean  an  unorganised 
machine  of  the  following  general  character: 

The  configurations  of  the  machine  are  described  by  two  expressions,  which  we 
may  call  the  character-expression  and  the  situation-expression.  The  character 
and  situation  at  any  moment,  together  with  the  input  signals,  determine  the 
character  and  situation  at  the  next  moment.  The  character  may  be  subject  to 
some  random  variation.  Pleasure  interference  has  a  tendency  to  fix  the  character 
i.e.  towards  preventing  it  changing,  whereas  pain  stimuli  tend  to  disrupt  the 
character,  causing  features  which  had  become  fixed  to  change,  or  to  become 
again  subject  to  random  variation. 

This  definition  is  probably  too  vague  and  general  to  be  very  helpful.  The  idea 
is  that  when  the  ‘character’  changes  we  like  to  think  of  it  as  a  change  in  the 
machine,  but  the  ‘situation’  is  merely  the  configuration  of  the  machine  described 
by  the  character.  It  is  intended  that  pain  stimuli  occur  when  the  machine’s 
behaviour  is  wrong,  pleasure  stimuli  when  it  is  particularly  right.  With  appro¬ 
priate  stimuli  on  these  lines,  judiciously  operated  by  the  ‘teacher’,  one  may  hope 
that  the  ‘character’  will  converge  towards  the  one  desired,  i.e.  that  wrong  behav¬ 
iour  will  tend  to  become  rare. 

I  have  investigated  a  particular  type  of  pleasure-pain  system,  which  I  will  now 
describe. 


11.  The  P-type  unorganised  machine 

The  P-type  machine  may  be  regarded  as  an  L.C.M.  without  a  tape,  and  whose 
description  is  largely  incomplete.  When  a  configuration  is  reached  for  which  the 
action  is  undetermined,  a  random  choice  for  the  missing  data  is  made  and  the 
appropriate  entry  is  made  in  the  description,  tentatively,  and  is  applied.  When  a 
pain  stimulus  occurs  all  tentative  entries  are  cancelled,  and  when  a  pleasure 
stimulus  occurs  they  are  all  made  permanent. 

Specifically.  The  situation  is  a  number  s  =  1,  2,  . . . ,  N  and  corresponds  to 
the  configuration  of  the  incomplete  machine.  The  character  is  a  table  of  N  entries 
showing  the  behaviour  of  the  machine  in  each  situation.  Each  entry  has  to  say 
something  both  about  the  next  situation  and  about  what  action  the  machine  has 
to  take.  The  action  part  may  be  either 

(i)  To  do  some  externally  visible  act  Ai  or  A2 . . .  A^ 


426  I  Alan  Turing 


(ii)  To  set  one  of  the  memory  units  Mi  . . .  either  into  the  ‘1’  condition  or 
into  the  ‘0’  condition. 

The  next  situation  is  always  the  remainder  either  of  2s  or  of  2s  +  1  on  division 
by  N.  These  may  be  called  alternatives  0  and  1 .  Which  alternative  applies  may  be 
determined  by  either 

(a)  One  of  the  memory  units 

(b)  A  sense  stimulus 

(c)  The  pleasure-pain  arrangements. 

In  each  situation  it  is  determined  which  of  these  applies  when  the  machine  is 
made,  i.e.  interference  cannot  alter  which  of  the  three  cases  applies.  Also  in  cases 
(a)  and  (b)  interference  can  have  no  effect.  In  case  (c)  the  entry  in  the  character 
table  maybe  either  U  (‘uncertain’),  or  TO  (tentative  0),  Tl,  DO  (definite  0)  or  Dl. 
When  the  entry  in  the  character  for  the  current  situation  is  U  then  the  alternative 
is  chosen  at  random,  and  the  entry  in  the  character  is  changed  to  TO  or  Tl 
according  as  0  or  1  was  chosen.  If  the  character  entry  was  TO  or  DO  then  the 
alternative  is  0  and  if  it  is  Tl  or  Dl  then  the  alternative  is  1.  The  changes  in 
character  include  the  above  mentioned  change  from  U  to  TO  or  Tl,  and  a  change 
of  every  T  to  D  when  a  pleasure  stimulus  occurs,  changes  of  TO  and  Tl  to  U 
when  a  pain  stimulus  occurs. 

We  may  imagine  the  memory  units  essentially  as  ‘trigger  circuits’  or  switches. 
The  sense  stimuli  are  means  by  which  the  teacher  communicates  ‘unemotionally’ 
to  the  machine,  i.e.  otherwise  than  by  pleasure  and  pain  stimuli.  There  are  a 
finite  number  5  of  sense  stimulus  lines,  and  each  always  carries  either  the  signal  0 
or  1. 

A  small  P-type  machine  is  described  in  the  table  below 

1  P  A 

2  P  B  Mi  =  1 

3  P  B 

4  Si  A  Mi  =  0 

5  Mi  C 

In  this  machine  there  is  only  one  memory  unit  Mi  and  one  sense  line  Si.  Its 
behaviour  can  be  described  by  giving  the  successive  situations  together  with  the 
actions  of  the  teacher:  the  latter  consist  of  the  values  of  Si  and  the  rewards  and 
punishments.  At  any  moment  the  ‘character’  consists  of  the  above  table  with 
each  ‘P’  replaced  by  either  U,  TO,  Tl,  DO  or  Dl.  In  working  out  the  behaviour  of 
the  machine  it  is  convenient  first  of  all  to  make  up  a  sequence  of  random  digits 
for  use  when  the  U  cases  occur.  Underneath  these  we  may  write  the  sequence  of 
situations,  and  have  other  rows  for  the  corresponding  entries  from  the  character, 
and  for  the  actions  of  the  teacher.  The  character  and  the  values  stored  in  the 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  427 


memory  units  may  be  kept  on  another  sheet.  The  T  entries  may  be  made  in 
pencil  and  the  D  entries  in  ink.  A  bit  of  the  behaviour  of  the  machine  is  given 
below: 


Random  sequence 
Situations 

Alternative  given  by 

Visible  action 
Rew.  &  Pun. 
Changes  in  Sj 






























U 

T 

T 

T 

T 

T 

U 

U 

S 

S 

S 

U 

T 










B 

A 

B 

A 

B 

A 

B 

A 

B 

A 

A 

A 

B 

B 

P 


1  0 


0  0  0 


It  will  be  noticed  that  the  machine  very  soon  got  into  a  repetitive  cycle.  This 
became  externally  visible  through  the  repetitive  BABAB ...  By  means  of  a  pain 
stimulus  this  cycle  was  broken. 

It  is  probably  possible  to  organise  these  P-type  machines  into  universal 
machines,  but  it  is  not  easy  because  of  the  form  of  memory  available.  It  would 
be  necessary  to  organise  the  randomly  distributed  ‘memory  units’  to  provide  a 
systematic  form  of  memory,  and  this  would  not  be  easy.  If,  however,  we  supply 
the  P-type  machine  with  a  systematic  external  memory  this  organising  becomes 
quite  feasible.  Such  a  memory  could  be  provided  in  the  form  of  a  tape,  and  the 
externally  visible  operations  could  include  movement  to  right  and  left  along  the 
tape,  and  altering  the  symbol  on  the  tape  to  0  or  to  1.  The  sense  lines  could 
include  one  from  the  symbol  on  the  tape.  Alternatively,  if  the  memory  were  to  be 
finite,  e.g.  not  more  than  232  binary  digits,  we  could  use  a  dialling  system. 
(Dialling  systems  can  also  be  used  with  an  infinite  memory,  but  this  is  not  of 
much  practical  interest.)  I  have  succeeded  in  organising  such  a  (paper)  machine 
into  a  universal  machine. 

The  details  of  the  machine  involved  were  as  follows.  There  was  a  circular 
memory  consisting  of  64  squares  of  which  at  any  moment  one  was  in  the 
machine  (‘scanned’)  and  motion  to  right  or  left  were  among  the  ‘visible  actions’. 
Changing  the  symbol  on  the  square  was  another  ‘visible  action’,  and  the  symbol 
was  connected  to  one  of  the  sense  lines  Si.  The  even-numbered  squares  also  had 
another  function,  they  controlled  the  dialling  of  information  to  or  from  the  main 
memory.  This  main  memory  consisted  of  232  binary  digits.  At  any  moment 
one  of  these  digits  was  connected  to  the  sense  line  S2.  The  digit  of  the  main 
memory  concerned  was  that  indicated  by  the  32  even  positioned  digits  of  the 
circular  memory.  Another  two  of  the  ‘visible  actions’  were  printing  0  or  1  in 
this  square  of  the  main  memory.  There  were  also  three  ordinary  memory  units 
and  three  sense  units  S3,  S4,  S5.  Also  six  other  externally  visible  actions  A,  B,  C, 
D,  E,  F. 

This  P-type  machine  with  external  memory  has,  it  must  be  admitted,  con¬ 
siderably  more  ‘organisation’  than  say  the  A-type  unorganised  machine. 


428  I  Alan  Turing 


Nevertheless  the  fact  that  it  can  be  organised  into  a  universal  machine  still 
remains  interesting. 

The  actual  technique  by  which  the  ‘organising’  of  the  P-type  machine  was 
carried  through  is  perhaps  a  little  disappointing.  It  is  not  sufficiently  analogous 
to  the  kind  of  process  by  which  a  child  would  really  be  taught.  The  process 
actually  adopted  was  first  to  let  the  machine  run  for  a  long  time  with  continuous 
application  of  pain,  and  with  various  changes  of  the  sense  data  S3,  S4)  S5. 
Observation  of  the  sequence  of  externally  visible  actions  for  some  thousands  of 
moments  made  it  possible  to  set  up  a  scheme  for  identifying  the  situations,  i.e.  by 
which  one  could  at  any  moment  find  out  what  the  situation  was,  except  that  the 
situations  as  a  whole  had  been  renamed.  A  similar  investigation,  with  less  use  of 
punishment,  enables  one  to  find  the  situations  which  are  affected  by  the  sense 
lines;  the  data  about  the  situations  involving  the  memory  units  can  also  be  found 
but  with  more  difficulty.  At  this  stage  the  character  has  been  reconstructed.  There 
are  no  occurrences  of  TO,  Tl,  DO,  Dl.  The  next  stage  is  to  think  up  some  way  of 
replacing  the  Us  of  the  character  by  DO,  Dl  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  the  desired 
modification.  This  will  normally  be  possible  with  the  suggested  number  of 
situations  (1000),  memory  units  etc.  The  final  stage  is  the  conversion  of  the 
character  into  the  chosen  one.  This  may  be  done  simply  by  allowing  the  machine 
to  wander  at  random  through  a  sequence  of  situations,  and  applying  pain  stimuli 
when  the  wrong  choice  is  made,  pleasure  stimuli  when  the  right  one  is  made.  It  is 
best  also  to  apply  pain  stimuli  when  irrelevant  choices  are  made.  This  is  to 
prevent  getting  isolated  in  a  ring  of  irrelevant  situations.  The  machine  is  now 
‘ready  for  use’. 

The  form  of  universal  machine  actually  produced  in  this  process  was  as 
follows.  Each  instruction  consisted  of  128  digits,  which  we  may  regard  as  forming 
four  sets  of  32  each  of  which  describes  one  place  in  the  main  memory.  These 
places  may  be  called  P,  Q,  R,  S.  The  meaning  of  the  instruction  is  that  if  p  is  the 
digit  at  P  and  q  that  at  Q  then  1  —  is  to  be  transferred  to  position  R  and  that 
the  next  instruction  will  be  found  in  the  128  digits  beginning  at  S.  This  gives  a 
U.P.C.M.,  though  with  rather  less  facilities  than  are  available  say  on  the  ACE. 

I  feel  that  more  should  be  done  on  these  lines.  I  would  like  to  investigate  other 
types  of  unorganised  machine,  and  also  to  try  out  organising  methods  that 
would  be  more  nearly  analogous  to  our  ‘methods  of  education’.  I  made  a  start 
on  the  latter  but  found  the  work  altogether  too  laborious  at  present.  When  some 
electronic  machines  are  in  actual  operation  I  hope  that  they  will  make  this  more 
feasible.  It  should  be  easy  to  make  a  model  of  any  particular  machine  that  one 
wishes  to  work  on  within  such  a  U.P.C.M.  instead  of  having  to  work  with  a  paper 
machine  as  at  present.  If  also  one  decided  on  quite  definite  ‘teaching  policies’ 
these  could  also  be  programmed  into  the  machine.  One  would  then  allow 
the  whole  system  to  run  for  an  appreciable  period,  and  then  break  in  as  a  kind 
of  ‘inspector  of  schools’  and  see  what  progress  had  been  made.  One  might  also  be 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  429 


able  to  make  some  progress  with  unorganised  machines  more  like  the  A-  and 
B-types.  The  work  involved  with  these  is  altogether  too  great  for  pure  paper- 
machine  work. 

One  particular  kind  of  phenomenon  I  had  been  hoping  to  find  in  connection 
with  the  P-type  machines.  This  was  the  incorporation  of  old  routines  into  new. 
One  might  have  ‘taught’  (i.e.  modified  or  organised)  a  machine  to  add  (say). 
Later  one  might  teach  it  to  multiply  by  small  numbers  by  repeated  addition  and 
so  arrange  matters  that  the  same  set  of  situations  which  formed  the  addition 
routine,  as  originally  taught,  was  also  used  in  the  additions  involved  in  the 
multiplication.  Although  I  was  able  to  obtain  a  fairly  detailed  picture  of  how 
this  might  happen  I  was  not  able  to  do  experiments  on  a  sufficient  scale  for  such 
phenomena  to  be  seen  as  part  of  a  larger  context. 

I  also  hoped  to  find  something  rather  similar  to  the  ‘irregular  verbs’  which  add 
variety  to  language.  We  seem  to  be  quite  content  that  things  should  not  obey  too 
mathematically  regular  rules.  By  long  experience  we  can  pick  up  and  apply  the 
most  complicated  rules  without  being  able  to  enunciate  them  at  all.  I  rather 
suspect  that  a  P-type  machine  without  the  systematic  memory  would  behave  in  a 
rather  similar  manner  because  of  the  randomly  distributed  memory  units. 
Clearly  this  could  only  be  verified  by  very  painstaking  work;  by  the  very  nature 
of  the  problem  ‘mass  production’  methods  like  built-in  teaching  procedures 
could  not  help. 


12.  Discipline  and  initiative 

If  the  untrained  infant’s  mind  is  to  become  an  intelligent  one,  it  must  acquire 
both  discipline  and  initiative.  So  far  we  have  been  considering  only  discipline.  To 
convert  a  brain  or  machine  into  a  universal  machine  is  the  extremest  form  of 
discipline.  Without  something  of  this  kind  one  cannot  set  up  proper  communi¬ 
cation.  But  discipline  is  certainly  not  enough  in  itself  to  produce  intelligence. 
That  which  is  required  in  addition  we  call  initiative.  This  statement  will  have  to 
serve  as  a  definition.  Our  task  is  to  discover  the  nature  of  this  residue  as  it  occurs 
in  man,  and  to  try  and  copy  it  in  machines. 

Two  possible  methods  of  setting  about  this  present  themselves.  On  the  one 
hand  we  have  fully  disciplined  machines  immediately  available,  or  in  a  matter  of 
months  or  years,  in  the  form  of  various  U.P.C.M.s.  We  might  try  to  graft  some 
initiative  onto  these.  This  would  probably  take  the  form  of  programming  the 
machine  to  do  every  kind  of  job  that  could  be  done,  as  a  matter  of  principle, 
whether  it  were  economical  to  do  it  by  machine  or  not.  Bit  by  bit  one  would  be 
able  to  allow  the  machine  to  make  more  and  more  ‘choices’  or  ‘decisions’.  One 
would  eventually  find  it  possible  to  programme  it  so  as  to  make  its  behaviour  be 
the  logical  result  of  a  comparatively  small  number  of  general  principles.  When 


430  I  Alan  Turing 


these  became  sufficiently  general,  interference  would  no  longer  be  necessary,  and 
the  machine  would  have  ‘grown  up’.  This  may  be  called  the  ‘direct  method’. 

The  other  method  is  to  start  with  an  unorganised  machine  and  to  try  to  bring 
both  discipline  and  initiative  into  it  at  once,  i.e.  instead  of  trying  to  organise  the 
machine  to  become  a  universal  machine,  to  organise  it  for  initiative  as  well.  Both 
methods  should,  I  think,  be  attempted. 

Intellectual,  Genetical,  and  Cultural  Searches 

A  very  typical  sort  of  problem  requiring  some  sort  of  initiative  consists  of  those 
of  the  form  ‘Find  a  number  n  such  that . . .  ’.  This  form  covers  a  very  great  variety 
of  problems.  For  instance  problems  of  the  form  ‘See  if  you  can  find  a  way  of 
calculating  the  function . . .  which  will  enable  us  to  obtain  the  values  for  argu¬ 
ments  ...  to  accuracy. . .  within  a  time  . . .  using  the  U.P.C.M _ ’  are  reducible  to 

this  form,  for  the  problem  is  clearly  equivalent  to  that  of  finding  a  programme  to 
put  on  the  machine  in  question,  and  it  is  easy  to  put  the  programmes  into 
correspondence  with  the  positive  integers  in  such  a  way  that  given  either  the 
number  or  the  programme  the  other  can  easily  be  found.  We  should  not  go  far 
wrong  for  the  time  being  if  we  assumed  that  all  problems  were  reducible  to  this 
form.  It  will  be  time  to  think  again  when  something  turns  up  which  is  obviously 
not  of  this  form. 

The  crudest  way  of  dealing  with  such  a  problem  is  to  take  the  integers  in  order 
and  to  test  each  one  to  see  whether  it  has  the  required  property,  and  to  go  on 
until  one  is  found  which  has  it.  Such  a  method  will  only  be  successful  in  the 
simplest  cases.  For  instance  in  the  case  of  problems  of  the  kind  mentioned  above, 
where  one  is  really  searching  for  a  programme,  the  number  required  will 
normally  be  somewhere  between  21000  and  21’000’000.  For  practical  work  therefore 
some  more  expeditious  method  is  necessary.  In  a  number  of  cases  the  following 
method  would  be  successful.  Starting  with  a  U.P.C.M.  we  first  put  a  programme 
into  it  which  corresponds  to  building  in  a  logical  system  (like  Russell’s  Principia 
Mathematica).  This  would  not  determine  the  behaviour  of  the  machine  com¬ 
pletely:  at  various  stages  more  than  one  choice  as  to  the  next  step  would  be 
possible.  We  might  however  arrange  to  take  all  possible  arrangements  of  choices 
in  order,  and  go  on  until  the  machine  proved  a  theorem  which,  by  its  form,  could 
be  verified  to  give  a  solution  of  the  problem.  This  may  be  seen  to  be  a  conversion 
of  the  original  problem  into  another  of  the  same  form.  Instead  of  searching 
through  values  of  the  original  variable  n  one  searches  through  values  of  some¬ 
thing  else.  In  practice  when  solving  problems  of  the  above  kind  one  will  probably 
apply  some  very  complex  ‘transformation’  of  the  original  problem,  involving 
searching  through  various  variables,  some  more  analogous  to  the  original  one, 
some  more  like  a  ‘search  through  all  proofs’.  Further  research  into  intelligence  of 
machinery  will  probably  be  very  greatly  concerned  with  ‘searches’  of  this  kind. 
We  may  perhaps  call  such  searches  ‘intellectual  searches’.  They  might  very  briefly 


Intelligent  Machinery  I  431 

be  defined  as  ‘searches  carried  out  by  brains  for  combinations  with  particular 
properties’. 

It  may  be  of  interest  to  mention  two  other  kinds  of  search  in  this  connection. 
There  is  the  genetical  or  evolutionary  search  by  which  a  combination  of  genes  is 
looked  for,  the  criterion  being  survival  value.  The  remarkable  success  of  this 
search  confirms  to  some  extent  the  idea  that  intellectual  activity  consists  mainly 
of  various  kinds  of  search. 

The  remaining  form  of  search  is  what  I  should  like  to  call  the  ‘cultural  search’. 
As  I  have  mentioned,  the  isolated  man  does  not  develop  any  intellectual  power.  It 
is  necessary  for  him  to  be  immersed  in  an  environment  of  other  men,  whose 
techniques  he  absorbs  during  the  first  20  years  of  his  life.  He  may  then  perhaps 
do  a  little  research  of  his  own  and  make  a  very  few  discoveries  which  are  passed 
on  to  other  men.  From  this  point  of  view  the  search  for  new  techniques  must  be 
regarded  as  carried  out  by  the  human  community  as  a  whole,  rather  than  by 
individuals. 


13.  Intelligence  as  an  emotional  concept 

The  extent  to  which  we  regard  something  as  behaving  in  an  intelligent  manner  is 
determined  as  much  by  our  own  state  of  mind  and  training  as  by  the  properties 
of  the  object  under  consideration.  If  we  are  able  to  explain  and  predict  its 
behaviour  or  if  there  seems  to  be  little  underlying  plan,  we  have  little  temptation 
to  imagine  intelligence.  With  the  same  object  therefore  it  is  possible  that  one 
man  would  consider  it  as  intelligent  and  another  would  not;  the  second  man 
would  have  found  out  the  rules  of  its  behaviour. 

It  is  possible  to  do  a  little  experiment  on  these  lines,  even  at  the  present  stage 
of  knowledge.  It  is  not  difficult  to  devise  a  paper  machine  which  will  play  a  not 
very  bad  game  of  chess.  Now  get  three  men  as  subjects  for  the  experiment  A,  B, 
C.  A  and  C  are  to  be  rather  poor  chess  players,  B  is  the  operator  who  works  the 
paper  machine.  (In  order  that  he  should  be  able  to  work  it  fairly  fast  it  is 
advisable  that  he  be  both  mathematician  and  chess  player.)  Two  rooms  are 
used  with  some  arrangement  for  communicating  moves,  and  a  game  is  played 
between  C  and  either  A  or  the  paper  machine.  C  may  find  it  quite  difficult  to  tell 
which  he  is  playing. 

(This  is  a  rather  idealized  form  of  an  experiment  I  have  actually  done.) 


Summary 

The  possible  ways  in  which  machinery  might  be  made  to  show  intelligent 
behaviour  are  discussed.  The  analogy  with  the  human  brain  is  used  as  a  guiding 
principle.  It  is  pointed  out  that  the  potentialities  of  the  human  intelligence  can 


432  I  Alan  Turing 

only  be  realised  if  suitable  education  is  provided.  The  investigation  mainly 
centres  round  an  analogous  teaching  process  applied  to  machines.  The  idea  of 
an  unorganised  machine  is  defined,  and  it  is  suggested  that  the  infant  human 
cortex  is  of  this  nature.  Simple  examples  of  such  machines  are  given,  and  their 
education  by  means  of  rewards  and  punishments  is  discussed.  In  one  case  the 
education  process  is  carried  through  until  the  organisation  is  similar  to  that  of  an 
ACE.