

Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  (1938) 


Alan  Turing 


Introduction 

Jack  Copeland 

The  Princeton  Years,  1936-38 

On  23  September  1936  Turing  left  England  on  a  vessel  bound  for  New  York.1  His 
destination  was  Princeton  University,  where  the  Mathematics  Department  and 
the  Institute  for  Advanced  Study  combined  to  make  Princeton  a  leading  centre 
for  mathematics.  Turing  had  applied  unsuccessfully  for  a  Visiting  Fellowship  to 
Princeton  in  the  spring  of  1935. 2  When  a  year  later  he  learned  of  Church’s 
work  at  Princeton  on  the  Entscheidungsproblem ,  which  paralleled  his  own  (see 
‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’),  Turing  ‘decided  quite  definitely’  to  go 
there.3  He  planned  to  stay  for  a  year. 

In  mid- 1937  the  offer  of  a  Visiting  Fellowship  for  the  next  academic  year 
persuaded  him  to  prolong  his  visit,  and  he  embarked  on  a  Ph.D.  thesis.  Already 
advanced  in  his  academic  career,  Turing  was  an  unusual  graduate  student  (in  the 
autumn  of  1937,  he  himself  was  appointed  by  Cambridge  University  to  examine 
a  Ph.D.  thesis).  By  October  1937  Turing  was  looking  forward  to  his  thesis  being 
‘done  by  about  Christmas’.  It  took  just  a  little  longer:  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on 
Ordinals’  was  accepted  on  7  May  1938  and  the  degree  was  awarded  a  few  weeks 
later.4  The  following  year  the  thesis  was  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the 
London  Mathematical  Society. 

‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’  was  written  under  Church’s  supervision. 
His  relationship  to  Turing — whose  formalization  of  the  concept  of  an  effective 

1  S.  Turing,  Alan  M.  Turing  (Cambridge:  Heffer,  1959),  51. 

2  Letter  from  Turing  to  Sara  Turing,  his  mother,  24  May  1935  (in  the  Turing  Papers,  Modern  Archive 
Centre,  King’s  College  Library,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  K  1) ). 

3  Letter  from  Turing  to  Sara  Turing,  29  May  1936  (Turing  Papers,  catalogue  reference  K  1). 

4  Letter  from  Turing  to  Sara  Turing,  7  May  1938  (see  below);  Turing,  Alan  M.  Turing,  54.  The  thesis  is 
held  in  the  Seeley  G.  Mudd  Manuscript  Library  at  Princeton  University  (catalogue  reference  P685. 1938.47). 


126  I  Jack  Copeland 


procedure  and  work  on  the  Entscheidungsproblem  was  ‘possibly  more  convincing’ 
than  Church’s  own5 — was  hardly  the  usual  one  of  doctoral  supervisor  to  gradu¬ 
ate  student.  In  an  interview  given  in  1984,  Church  remarked  that  Turing  ‘had  the 
reputation  of  being  a  loner’  and  said:  ‘I  forgot  about  him  when  I  was  speaking 
about  my  own  graduate  students — truth  is,  he  was  not  really  mine.’6  Neverthe¬ 
less  Turing  and  Church  had  ‘a  lot  of  contact’  and  Church  ‘discussed  his 
dissertation  with  him  rather  carefully’.7  Church’s  influence  was  not  all  for 
the  good,  however.  In  May  1938  Turing  wrote: 

My  Ph.D.  thesis  has  been  delayed  a  good  deal  more  than  I  had  expected.  Church  made  a 
number  of  suggestions  which  resulted  in  the  thesis  being  expanded  to  an  appalling  length. 
I  hope  the  length  of  it  won’t  make  it  difficult  to  get  it  published.8 

Moreover,  Turing  elected  to  couch  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’  in  the 
notation  of  Church’s  lambda  calculus,  so  making  his  work  much  less  accessible  than 
it  might  otherwise  have  been.  (By  that  time  even  Church’s  student  Kleene,  who  had 
contributed  importantly  to  the  development  of  the  lambda  calculus,  had  turned 
away  from  it.  Kleene  said:  ‘I  myself,  perhaps  unduly  influenced  by  rather  chilly 
receptions  from  audiences  around  1933-35  to  disquisitions  on  X-definability, 
chose,  after  general  recursiveness  had  appeared,  to  put  my  work  in  that  format.’9) 
In  a  letter  written  not  long  after  Turing’s  death,  Turing’s  friend  Robin  Gandy 
said:  ‘Alan  considered  that  his  paper  on  ordinal  logics  had  never  received  the 
attention  it  deserved  (he  wouldn’t  admit  that  it  was  a  stinker  to  read).’10 

Notwithstanding  its  notational  obscurity,  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordin¬ 
als’  is  a  profound  work  of  first  rank  importance.  Among  its  achievements  are  the 
exploration  of  a  means  of  circumventing  Godel’s  incompleteness  theorems;  the 
introduction  of  the  concept  of  an  ‘oracle  machine’,  thereby  opening  the  field  of 
relative  computability;  and,  in  the  wake  of  the  demolition  of  the  Hilbert  pro¬ 
gramme  (by  Godel,  Turing,  and  Church),  an  analysis  of  the  place  of  intuition  in 
mathematics  and  logic. 

Turing’s  two  years  at  Princeton  are  the  best  documented  of  his  life,  thanks  to  a 
series  of  letters  that  he  wrote  to  Sara  Turing.  (Of  the  fifty- five  letters  that  he  sent 
her  from  1932  until  his  death,  twenty-seven  are  from  the  Princeton  period.)  The 
following  excerpts  give  a  glimpse  of  his  time  there.  All  were  written  from  the 
Graduate  College,  Princeton  University.11 


5  See  the  subsection  ‘Church’s  contribution’  of  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’. 

6  Church  in  interview  with  William  Aspray  (17  May  1984);  transcript  no.  5  in  the  series  ‘The  Princeton 
Mathematics  Community  in  the  1930s’,  Princeton  University. 

7  Ibid. 

8  See  below. 

9  S.  C.  Kleene,  ‘Origins  of  Recursive  Function  Theory’,  Annals  of  the  History  of  Computing,  3  (1981), 
52-67  (62). 

10  Letter  from  Gandy  to  Max  Newman,  n.d.  (Turing  Papers,  catalogue  reference  A  8). 

11  All  the  letters  are  in  the  Turing  Papers  (catalogue  reference  K  1). 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  127 


Excerpts  from  Turing’s  Letters  Home 

6  October  193612 

I  reached  here  late  last  Tuesday  evening.13  We  were  practically  in  New  York  at  1 1:00  a.m.  on 
Tuesday  but  what  with  going  through  quarantine  and  passing  the  immigration  officers  we 
were  not  off  the  boat  until  5:30  p.m.  Passing  the  immigration  officers  involved  waiting  in  a 
queue  for  over  two  hours  with  screaming  children  round  me.  Then,  after  getting  through 
the  customs  I  had  to  go  through  the  ceremony  of  initiation  to  the  U.S.A.,  consisting  of 
being  swindled  by  a  taxi  driver.  I  considered  his  charge  perfectly  preposterous,  but  as  I  had 
already  been  charged  more  than  double  English  prices  for  sending  my  luggage,  I  thought  it 
was  possibly  right.  However,  more  knowing  people  say  it  was  too  much.  . . . 

The  mathematics  department  here  comes  fully  up  to  expectations.  There  is  a  great 
number  of  the  most  distinguished  mathematicians  here.  J.  v.  Neumann,  Weyl,  Courant, 
Hardy,  Einstein,  Lefschetz,  as  well  as  hosts  of  smaller  fry.  Unfortunately  there  are  not 
nearly  so  many  logic  people  here  as  last  year.  Church  is  here  of  course,  but  Godel,  Kleene, 
Rosser  and  Bernays  who  were  here  last  year  have  left.  I  don’t  think  I  mind  very  much 
missing  any  of  these  except  Godel.  Kleene  and  Rosser  are,  I  imagine,  just  disciples  of 
Church  and  have  not  much  to  offer  that  I  could  not  get  from  Church.  Bernays  [I]  think  is 
getting  rather  ‘vieux  jeu’:  that  is  the  impression  I  get  from  his  writing,  but  if  I  were  to  meet 
him  I  might  get  a  different  impression. 

The  graduate  students  include  a  very  large  number  who  are  working  in  mathematics, 
and  none  of  them  mind  talking  shop.  It  is  very  different  from  Cambridge  in  that  way. 

I  have  seen  Church  two  or  three  times  and  I  get  on  with  him  very  well.  He  seems  quite 
pleased  with  my  paper14  and  thinks  it  will  help  him  to  carry  out  a  programme  of  work  he 
has  in  mind.  I  don’t  know  how  much  I  shall  have  to  do  with  this  programme  of  his,  as  I 
am  now  developping  [sic]  the  thing  in  a  slightly  different  direction,  and  shall  probably 
start  writing  a  paper  on  it  in  a  month  or  two.15  After  that  I  may  write  a  book. 

The  proofs16  have  been  sent  direct  to  me  here.  They  arrived  last  Saturday,  and  I  have 
just  finished  them  and  sent  them  off.  It  should  not  be  long  now  before  the  paper  comes 
out.  I  have  arranged  for  the  reprints17  to  be  sent  to  you,  and  will  get  you,  if  you  would 
not  mind,  to  send  out  the  ones  that  are  to  go  to  people  in  Europe,  and  to  send  some  of 
the  remainder  on  to  me.  . . . 

These  Americans  have  various  peculiarities  in  conversation  which  catch  the  ear  some¬ 
how.  Whenever  you  thank  them  for  any  thing  they  say  ‘You’re  welcome’.  I  rather  liked  it  at 
first,  thinking  that  I  was  welcome,  but  now  I  find  it  comes  back  like  a  ball  thrown  against  a 
wall,  and  become  positively  apprehensive.  Another  habit  they  have  is  to  make  the  sound 

12  Editor’s  note.  Sara  Turing’s  dating  of  the  letters  is  followed  where  dates  are  absent  or  incomplete. 

13  Editor’s  note.  Turing’s  previous  letter  to  Sara  on  28  Sept.  1936  was  written  on  board  the  vessel 
Berengaria  bound  for  New  York. 

14  Editor’s  note.  Presumably  ‘On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an  Application  to  the  Entscheidungs- 
problem’. 

15  Editor’s  note.  This  may  refer  to  the  ‘development  of  the  theory  of  functions  of  a  real  variable’ 
mentioned  by  Turing  on  p.  58  of  Chapter  1.  No  such  paper  ever  appeared,  nor  a  book. 

16  Editor’s  note.  Here  the  letter  is  marked  ‘  “On  Computable  Numbers”  ’  in  Sara’s  hand. 

17  Editor’s  note.  The  author’s  copies  of  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’. 


128  I  Alan  Turing 


described  by  authors  as  ‘Aha’.  They  use  it  when  they  have  no  suitable  reply  to  a  remark,  but 
think  that  silence  would  be  rude. 

Maurice  Pryce  has  just  got  a  Fellowship  at  Trinity.18 

14  October  193619 

I  have  just  discovered  a  possible  application  of  the  kind  of  thing  I  am  working  on  at 
present.  It  answers  the  question  ‘What  is  the  most  general  kind  of  code  or  cipher  possible’, 
and  at  the  same  time  (rather  naturally)  enables  one  to  construct  a  lot  of  particular  and 
interesting  codes.  One  of  them  is  pretty  well  impossible  to  decode  without  the  key  and 
very  quick  to  encode.  I  expect  I  could  sell  them  to  H.  M.  Government  for  quite  a 
substantial  sum,  but  am  rather  doubtful  about  the  morality  of  such  things.  . . . 

Church  had  me  out  to  dinner  the  other  night.  Considering  that  the  guests  were  all 
university  people  I  found  the  conversation  rather  disappointing.  They  seem,  from  what  I 
can  remember  of  it,  to  have  discussed  nothing  but  the  different  States  that  they  came 
from.  Description  of  travel  and  places  bores  me  intensely. 

I  had  a  nasty  shock  when  I  got  into  Church’s  house.  I  think  I  had  told  you  that  Church 
was  half  blind  in  one  eye.  Well  I  saw  his  father  in  the  house  and  he  was  quite  blind  (and 
incidentally  very  deaf).  I  should  have  thought  very  little  of  it  had  it  not  been  for  Church 
being  rather  blind  himself.  Any  hereditary  defects  of  that  kind  give  me  the  shudders. 

Hardy  is  here  for  this  term.  At  first  he  was  very  standoffish  or  possibly  shy.  I  met  him  in 
Maurice  Pryce’s  rooms  the  day  I  arrived,  and  he  didn’t  say  a  word  to  me.  But  he  is  getting 
much  more  friendly  now. 


3  November  1936 

Church  has  just  suggested  to  me  that  I  should  give  a  lecture  to  the  Mathematical  Club  here 
on  my  Computable  Numbers.  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  get  an  opportunity  to  do  this,  as  it 
will  bring  the  thing  to  people’s  attention  a  bit.  . . . 

I  have  got  one  or  two  things  on  hand  at  present  not  connected  with  my  work  in  logic, 
but  in  theory  of  groups.20  One  of  them  is  something  I  did  about  a  year  ago  and  left  in  cold 
storage,  and  which  Baer  thinks  is  quite  useful;  but  of  course  am  not  taking  these  things  so 
seriously  as  the  logic. 

Tonight  is  the  evening  of  election  day  and  all  results  are  coming  out  over  the  wireless 
(‘radio’  they  say  in  the  native  language).  My  method  of  getting  the  results  is  to  go  to  bed 
and  read  them  in  the  paper  next  morning. 

11  November  1936 

One  of  the  Commonwealth  Fellows,  Francis  Price  (not  to  be  confused  with  Maurice  Pryce 
or  Bobby  Price)  arranged  a  hockey  match  the  other  day  between  the  Graduate  College  and 


18  Editor’s  note.  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 

19  Editor’s  note.  Sara  has  written  ‘probably’  against  the  date. 

20  Editor’s  note.  In  1938  Turing  published  two  papers  in  group  theory:  ‘Finite  Approximations  to  Lie 
Groups’  ( Annals  of  Mathematics,  39:  105-11),  which  developed  a  method  due  to  R.  Baer,  and  ‘The 
Extensions  of  a  Group’  ( Compositio  Mathematica,  5:  357-67). 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  129 


Vassar,  a  women’s  college  (amer.)/university  (engl.)  some  130  miles  away.  He  got  up  a 
team  of  which  only  half  had  ever  played  before.  We  had  a  couple  of  practice  games 
and  went  to  Vassar  in  cars  on  Sunday.  It  was  raining  slightly  when  we  arrived,  and 
what  was  our  horror  when  we  were  told  the  ground  was  not  fit  for  play.  However  we 
persuaded  them  to  let  us  play  a  pseudo-hockey  game  in  their  gymn.  at  wh.  we  defeated 
them  1 1-3.  Francis  is  trying  to  arrange  a  return  match,  which  will  certainly  take  place  on  a 
field. 

22  November  1936 

I  am  sending  you  some  cuttings  about  Mrs  Simpson  as  representative  sample  of  what  we 
get  over  here  on  this  subject.  I  don’t  suppose  you  have  even  heard  of  her,  but  some  days  it 
has  been  ‘front  page  stuff’  here. 

The  hockey  here  has  become  a  regular  fixture  three  days  a  week.  It’s  great  fun. 

1  December  1936 

I  spent  a  good  deal  of  my  time  in  New  York  pottering  about  Manhattan  getting  used  to 
their  traffic  and  subways  (underground).  I  went  to  the  Planetarium.  . . . 

I  am  giving  my  lecture  to  the  Maths  Club  tomorrow. 


3  December  1936 

I  am  horrified  at  the  way  people  are  trying  to  interfere  with  the  King’s  marriage.  It  may  be 
that  the  King  should  not  marry  Mrs  Simpson,  but  it  is  his  private  concern.  I  should 
tolerate  no  interference  by  bishops  myself  and  I  don’t  see  that  the  King  need  either. 

II  December  1936 

I  suppose  this  business  of  the  King’s  abdication  has  come  as  rather  a  shock  to  you.  I  gather 
practically  nothing  was  known  of  Mrs  Simpson  in  England  till  about  ten  days  ago.  I  am 
rather  divided  on  my  opinion  of  the  whole  matter.  At  first  I  was  wholly  in  favour  of  the 
King  retaining  the  throne  and  marrying  Mrs  Simpson,  and  if  this  were  the  only  issue  it 
would  still  be  my  opinion.  However  I  have  heard  talk  recently  which  seems  to  alter  it 
rather.  It  appears  that  the  King  was  extremely  lax  about  state  documents  leaving  them 
about  and  letting  Mrs  Simpson  and  friends  see  them.  There  had  been  distressing  leakages. 
Also  one  or  two  other  things  of  same  character,  but  this  is  the  one  I  mind  about  most. 

December  1936  (no  day) 

. . .  Talking  of  Christmas  reminds  me  that  as  a  small  child  I  was  quite  unable  to  predict 
when  it  would  fall,  I  didn’t  even  realise  that  it  came  at  regular  intervals. 

1  January  1937 

I  have  been  away  with  Maurice  skiing  in  New  Hampshire.  . . . 

I  am  sorry  that  Edward  VIII  has  been  bounced  into  abdicating.  I  believe  the  Govern¬ 
ment  wanted  to  get  rid  of  him  and  found  Mrs  Simpson  a  good  opportunity.  Whether  they 
were  wise  to  try  to  get  rid  of  him  is  another  matter.  I  respect  Edward  for  his  courage.  As 


130  I  Alan  Turing 


for  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  I  consider  his  behaviour  disgraceful.  He  waited  until 
Edward  was  safely  out  of  the  way  and  then  unloaded  a  whole  lot  of  quite  uncalled-for 
abuse.  He  didn’t  dare  do  it  whilst  Edward  was  King.  Further  he  had  no  objections  to  the 
King  having  Mrs  Simpson  as  a  mistress,  but  marry  her,  that  wouldn’t  do  at  all.  I  don’t  see 
how  you  can  say  that  Edward  was  guilty  of  wasting  his  ministers  time  and  wits  at  a  critical 
moment.  It  was  Baldwin  who  opened  the  subject. 

There  was  rather  bad  attendance  at  the  Maths  Club  for  my  lecture  on  Dec  2.  One 
should  have  a  reputation  if  one  hopes  to  be  listened  to.  The  week  following  my  lecture 
G.  D.  Birkhoff  came  down.  He  has  a  very  good  reputation  and  the  room  was  packed. 
But  his  lecture  wasn’t  up  to  standard  at  all.  In  fact  everyone  was  just  laughing  about  it 
afterwards. 


27  January  1937 

I  have  just  finished  a  paper21  in  group  theory;  not  a  very  exciting  one  this  time.  I  shall  send 
it  off  in  a  day  or  two  to  the  L.  M.  S22  or  possibly  to  the  ‘Annals  of  Mathematics’,  which 
is  the  Princeton  mathematical  journal. 

There  was  a  problem  in  the  ‘Caliban’  volume  of  the  N  S  &  N23  a  few  weeks  ago  set  by 
Eddington.  It  was  phrased  in  Alice  through  the  Looking  Glass  language  and  called 
‘Looking  Glass  Zoo’.  The  solution  picked  out  for  publication  was  also  in  looking  glass 
language  and  sent  by  ‘Champ’,  i.e.  Champernowne.24  It  started  off  ‘There  couldn’t  have 
been  more  than  three  girls’  reflected  Humpty  Dumpty  ‘because  a  girl  is  always  the 
square  root  of  minus  one,  and  there  are  only  12  of  those,  they  taught  us  that  at 
school’.  . . . 

Maurice  and  Francis  Price  arranged  a  party  with  a  Treasure  Hunt  last  Sunday.  There 
were  13  clues  of  various  kinds,  cryptograms,  anagrams  and  others  completely  obscure  to 
me.  It  was  all  very  ingenious,  but  I  am  not  much  use  at  them. 


11  February  1937 

The  printers  for  the  L.  M.  S  have  been  rather  inefficient,  sending  the  reprints  straight  on  to 
me  instead  of  looking  at  the  address  I  had  filled  up  on  their  form.  Unfortunately  I  had  not 
kept  a  second  copy  of  all  the  addresses  I  gave  you,  so  as  they  are  rather  tiresome  to  find  I 
am  sending  some  of  the  reprints  back  to  you  to  deal  with  if  you  can  find  time  before  you 
go.  ...  I  have  dealt  with 

All  King’s  addresses 

Littlewood 

Wittgenstein 

Newman 

Atkins 

Eperson 


21  Editor’s  note.  Presumably  ‘Finite  Approximations  to  Lie  Groups’  (see  above). 

22  Editor’s  note.  London  Mathematical  Society. 

23  Editor’s  note.  New  Statesman  and  Nation. 

24  Editor’s  note.  See  the  introduction  to  Chapter  16. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  131 


I  am  told  that  Bertrand  Russell  is  inclined  to  be  ashamed  of  his  peerage,  so  the  situation 
calls  for  tact.  I  suggest  that  the  correct  address  for  an  earl  be  used  on  envelope,  but 
that  you  mark  the  reprint  itself  ‘Bertrand  Russell’  on  the  top  right  hand  comer  of  the 
cover. 

22  February  1937 

I  went  to  the  Eisenhart’s  regular  Sunday  tea  yesterday,  and  there  they  took  me  in  relays  to 
try  and  persuade  me  to  stay  another  year.  Mrs  Eisenhart  mostly  put  forward  social  or 
semi-moral  semi  sociological  reasons  why  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  have  a  second  year. 
The  Dean25  weighed  in  with  hints  that  the  Procter  Fellowship26  was  mine  for  the  asking 
(this  is  worth  $2,000  p.a.).  I  said  I  thought  King’s  would  probably  prefer  that  I  return, 
but  gave  some  vague  promise  that  I  would  sound  them  on  the  matter.  Whether  I  want 
to  stay  is  another  matter.  The  people  I  know  here  will  all  be  leaving,  and  I  don’t  much 
care  about  the  idea  of  spending  a  long  summer  in  this  country.  ...  I  think  it  is  most 
likely  I  shall  come  back  to  England. 

I  have  had  two  letters  asking  for  reprints27,  one  from  Braithwaite28  at  King’s  and 
one  from  a  proffessor  [sic]  in  Germany29 . . .  They  seemed  very  much  interested  in 
the  paper.  1  think  possibly  it  is  making  a  certain  amount  of  impression.  1  was 
disappointed  by  its  reception  here.  I  expected  Weyl  who  had  done  some  work 
connected  quite  closely  with  it  some  years  ago  at  least  to  have  made  a  few  remarks 
about  it. 

15  March  193730 

I  only  wrote  to  the  Provost31  last  week  so  don’t  expect  to  hear  from  him  just  yet. 
I  was  rather  diffident  and  apologetic  and  told  him  most  probably  I  should  be  coming 
back. 

29  March  1937 

I  have  been  sent  a  notice  of  lecturers  in  mathematics  to  be  appointed  next  term,  by  Philip 
Hall.32  Maurice  and  I  are  both  putting  in  for  it,  though  I  don’t  suppose  either  of  us  will  get 
it:  I  think  it  is  a  good  thing  to  start  putting  in  for  these  things  early,  so  as  to  get  one’s 
existence  recognised.33  It’s  a  thing  I  am  rather  liable  to  neglect.  Maurice  is  much  more 
conscious  of  what  are  the  right  things  to  do  to  help  his  career.  He  makes  great  social 
efforts  with  the  mathematical  bigwigs.  . . . 


25  Editor’s  note.  Luther  Eisenhart,  Dean  of  the  Graduate  College. 

26  Editor’s  note.  The  Jane  Eliza  Procter  Visiting  Fellowship. 

27  Editor’s  note.  Reprints  of  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’. 

28  Editor’s  note.  See  Chapter  14. 

29  Editor’s  note.  H.  Scholz.  Scholz’s  postcard  is  in  the  Turing  Papers  (catalogue  reference  D  5). 

30  Editor’s  note.  Turing  wrote  ‘15  Feb  ’37’;  ‘Feb’  has  been  corrected  on  the  letter  to  ‘Mar’. 

31  Editor’s  note.  Provost  of  King’s  College,  Cambridge. 

32  Editor’s  note.  Hall  was  a  Fellow  of  King’s.  In  1938  Hall  became  Secretary  of  the  London  Mathematical 
Society. 

33  Editor’s  note.  Turing  did  not  get  the  lectureship. 


132  I  Alan  Turing 


I  am  now  working  out  some  new  ideas  in  logic.34  Not  so  good  as  the  computable 
numbers,  but  quite  hopeful. 

78  April  1937 

The  temperature  here  is  going  right  up  already.  It’s  almost  like  June  now.  Tennis  has 
started.  They  play  on  courts  of  dry  clay.  Easier  on  the  feet  (and  probably  on  the  pocket) 
than  our  hard  courts,  but  not  very  quick  at  recovering  from  showers. 

There  was  a  return  hockey  match  on  Sunday  against  Vassar,  who  came  over  to  us  this 
time.  We  defeated  them  quite  easily,  but  I  think  only  because  we  could  run  faster. 

I  shall  certainly  be  coming  back  in  July.35 

79  May  1937 

I  have  just  made  up  my  mind  to  spend  another  year  here,  but  I  shall  be  going  back  to 
England  for  most  of  summer  in  accordance  with  previous  programme.  Thank  you  very 
much  for  your  offer  of  help  with  this:  I  shall  not  need  it,  for  if  I  have  this  Procter  as  the 
Dean  suggests  I  shall  be  a  rich  man,  and  otherwise  I  shall  go  back  to  Cambridge.  Another 
year  here  on  the  same  terms  would  be  rather  an  extravagance.  I  don’t  think  there  can  be 
any  reasonable  doubt  I  shall  have  the  Procter:  the  Dean  would  hardly  have  made  any 
remarks  about  it  unless  they  meant  something.  . . . 

My  boat  sails  June  23. 1  might  possibly  do  a  little  travelling  here  before  the  boat  goes,  as 
there  will  be  very  little  doing  here  during  the  next  month  and  it’s  not  a  fearfully  good 
time  of  year  for  work.  More  likely  I  shall  not  as  I  don’t  usually  travel  for  the  sake  of 
travelling. 

75  June  1937 

Have  just  been  back  from  Cousin  Jack’s  a  couple  of  days.  I  went  up  north  with  Maurice  in 
his  car  and  Maurice  stayed  a  night  with  Cousin  Jack,  and  made  a  good  impression  there. 
I  enjoyed  the  time  I  spent  at  Cousin  Jack’s.  He  is  an  energetic  old  bird.  He  has  a  little 
observatory  with  a  telescope  that  he  made  for  himself.  He  told  me  all  about  the  grinding 
of  mirrors.  ...  I  think  he  comes  into  competition  with  Aunt  Sybil  for  the  Relations  Merit 
Diploma.  Cousin  Mary  is  a  little  bit  of  a  thing  you  could  pick  up  and  put  in  your  pocket. 
She  is  very  hospitable  and  rather  timid:  she  worships  Cousin  Jack.  Cousin  Mary’s  sister 
Annie  also  lives  in  the  house.  I  forgot  her  surname  very  soon  after  I  was  told  it,  which  put 
me  at  rather  a  disadvantage. 

I  am  just  starting  in  on  packing  etc. 

4  October  1937 

Journey36  completed  without  any  mishap  more  serious  than  loss  of  my  fountain  pen  a  few 
hours  after  getting  on  board.  . . . 

A  vast  parcel  of  manuscript  arrived  for  me  from  the  L.  M.  S  secretary  the  other  day.  It 
was  a  paper  for  me  to  referee;  135  pages.  Also  have  just  heard  from  Bernays. 

34  Editor’s  note.  Presumably  the  ideas  that  formed  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’. 

35  Editor’s  note.  To  England. 

36  Editor’s  note.  From  England  to  the  United  States. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  133 


79  October  1937 

The  refereeing  business  rather  petered  out.  The  author’s  mathematical  technique  was 
hopelessly  faulty,  and  his  work  after  about  p.  30  was  based  on  so  many  erroneous  notions 
as  to  be  quite  hopeless.  So  I  had  to  send  it  back  and  say  so.  Rather  distressing  as  the  man 
has  apparently  been  working  on  it  for  18  months  or  so. 

I  am  working  on  my  Ph.D  thesis  now.  Should  have  it  done  by  about  Christmas. 

Scholz  of  Munster  sent  me  a  photolithoprinted  reprint  the  other  day,  containing  the  gist  of 
my  paper37  in  the  L.  M.  S,  apparently  as  ‘vorgetragt’38  in  Munster.  It  was  most  delight¬ 
fully  done,  with  most  excellent  translations  into  the  German  of  the  expressions  I 
had  used. 

2  November  1937 

Have  just  been  playing  in  a  hockey  match,  the  first  we  have  had  this  year.  The  team  is  not 
so  good  as  last  year’s,  our  two  brilliant  players  from  New  College  no  longer  being  in 
Princeton.  I  have  found  I  get  involved  with  making  a  good  deal  of  arrangements  for  these 
games,  but  it  has  not  yet  got  to  the  point  of  being  really  tiresome.  . . . 

I  am  getting  rather  more  competent  with  the  car . . . 

23  November  1937 

I  had  a  letter  the  other  day  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Faculty  Board  of  Mathematics 
at  Cambridge  asking  if  I  would  be  a  Ph.D  examiner:  the  candidate  is  the  same  man  whose 
paper  I  refereed  for  L.  M.  S.  After  some  hesitation  I  decided  to  take  this  thing  on. 
I  thought  it  might  be  rather  unsuitable  for  me  to  be  connected  with  it  twice,  but  I  talked 
to  Newman  (who  is  here  for  a  term)  about  it,  and  he  thought  such  scruples  were  rather 
foolish.  . . . 

There  is  a  mysterious  woman  in  Virginia  who  has  invited  me  to  stay  for  Christmas.  She 
gets  the  names  of  Englishmen  living  in  the  Graduate  College  from  Mrs  Eisenhart. 

c.  New  Year 39 

Did  I  tell  you  that  a  very  nice  man  called  Martin  (the  i  is  mute  in  this  country)  asked  me  to 
go  and  stay  with  him  in  South  Carolina  before  Christmas.  We  drove  down  from  here  in 
two  days  and  then  I  stayed  there  for  two  or  three  days  before  I  came  back  to  Virginia  to 
stay  with  Mrs  Welbourne.  It  was  quite  as  far  south  as  I  had  ever  been — about  34°. 
The  people  seem  to  be  all  very  poor  down  there  still,  even  though  it  is  so  long  since  the 
civil  war. 

Mrs  Welbourne  and  her  family  were  all  very  agreeable,  though  I  didn’t  make  much 
conversational  progress  with  any  of  them. 

Two  short  papers  of  mine  have  just  come  out  in  the  Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic.40 


37  Editor’s  note.  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’. 

38  Editor’s  note.  ‘Lectured’. 

39  Editor’s  note.  The  letter  is  undated  and  marked  ‘Reed.  Jan  14.  38’. 

40  Editor’s  note.  ‘Computability  and  X-Definability’  ( Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic ,  2  (1937),  153-63),  and 
‘The  ‘p’-Function  in  X-JC-Conversion’  ( Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic ,  2  (1937),  164). 


134  I  Alan  Turing 
7  March  1938 

I  went  to  ‘Murder  in  the  Cathedral’  last  Saturday  with  Will  James.  Was  very  much 
impressed  with  it.  It  was  very  much  easier  to  understand  when  acted  than  when  read. 
Most  particularly  this  was  so  with  the  choruses.  . . . 

I  can’t  say  for  certain  yet  when  I  will  be  back.  I  haven’t  yet  booked  a  passage.  Most 
probably  it  will  be  about  the  same  time  and  I  shall  be  going  up  for  the  Long41  again. 

72  April  1938 

Have  found  out  now  about  my  Fellowship:  it  has  been  renewed.  When  Daddy  wrote  me 
about  getting  a  job  here  I  thought  it  was  time  to  get  King’s  to  say  something  definite,  so  I 
sent  them  a  cable.  I  can’t  think  why  they  didn’t  let  me  know  before.  They  are  usually  rather 
strong  on  formal  notifications:  it  all  seems  rather  out  of  character. 

I  have  just  been  to  see  the  Dean  and  ask  him  about  possible  jobs  over  here;  mostly 
for  Daddy’s  information,  as  I  think  it  unlikely  I  shall  take  one  unless  you  are  actually 
at  war  before  July.  He  didn’t  know  of  one  at  present,  but  said  he  would  bear  it  all  in 
mind. 

Have  just  been  down  to  Washington  and  Annapolis  with  Will  James.  Will  went  to  visit 
some  people  who  are  running  St  John’s  College  Annapolis,  and  we  both  went  to  lunch 
there.  They  have  a  scheme  in  operation  for  teaching  people  by  making  them  read  a  vast 
syllabus  of  100%  concentrated  classics.  Kant’s  ‘Critique  of  Pure  Reason’  is  a  fairly  typical 
example.  The  trouble  about  it  is  that  they  are  so  deep  that  any  one  of  them  really  needs 
several  years  study  to  be  understood.  Presumably  their  undergraduates  will  only  get 
something  very  superficial  out  of  them. 

We  also  went  and  listened  to  the  Senate  for  a  time.  They  seemed  very  informal.  There 
were  only  six  or  eight  of  them  present  and  few  of  them  seemed  to  be  attending. 

7  May  1938 

There  was  quite  a  good  performance  of  ‘H.  M.  S.  Pinafore’  and  ‘Trial  by  Jury’  here  last 
week-end.  The  ‘Pinafore’  didn’t  seem  to  be  so  good  as  when  we  saw  it  in  Hertford  (and 
picked  up  measles).  ‘Trial  by  Jury’  was  very  good:  I  think  I  like  it  better  than  any  other 
Gilbert  and  Sullivan. 

My  Ph.D.  thesis  has  been  delayed  a  good  deal  more  than  I  had  expected.  Church  made  a 
number  of  suggestions  which  resulted  in  the  thesis  being  expanded  to  an  appalling  length. 
I  hope  the  length  of  it  won’t  make  it  difficult  to  get  it  published.  I  lost  some  time  too  when 
getting  it  typed  by  a  professional  typist  here.  I  took  it  to  a  firm  which  was  very  well  spoken 
of,  but  they  put  a  very  incompetent  girl  onto  it.  She  would  copy  things  down  wrong  on 
every  page  from  the  original,  which  was  almost  entirely  in  type.  I  made  long  lists  of 
corrections  to  be  done  and  even  then  it  would  not  be  right.  . . . 

The  thesis  has  just  been  accepted  to-day. 

I  expect  to  leave  here  at  the  beginning  of  July.  Shall  probably  go  direct  to  Cambridge. 

I  had  an  offer  of  a  job  here  as  von  Neumann’s  assistant  at  $1,500  a  year  but  decided  not 
to  take  it. 


41  Editor’s  note.  The  Cambridge  long  vacation. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  135 


The  Purpose  of  Ordinal  Logics 

Turing  explained  the  purpose  of  his  ‘ordinal  logics’  in  Section  11  of ‘Systems  of 
Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’.  He  first  distinguished  between  what  he  called  ‘intu¬ 
ition’  and  ‘ingenuity’  (a  distinction  that  is  discussed  again  in  Chapter  4  in  his 
letters  to  Newman): 

Mathematical  reasoning  may  be  regarded  rather  schematically  as  the  exercise  of  a  com¬ 
bination  of  two  faculties,  which  we  may  call  intuition  and  ingenuity.  The  activity  of  the 
intuition  consists  in  making  spontaneous  judgments  which  are  not  the  result  of  conscious 
trains  of  reasoning.  These  judgments  are  often  but  by  no  means  invariably  correct  (leaving 
aside  the  question  what  is  meant  by  ‘correct’).  Often  it  is  possible  to  find  some  other  way 
of  verifying  the  correctness  of  an  intuitive  judgment.  We  may,  for  instance,  judge  that  all 
positive  integers  are  uniquely  factorizable  into  primes;  a  detailed  mathematical  argument 
leads  to  the  same  result.  This  argument  will  also  involve  intuitive  judgments,  but  they  will 
be  less  open  to  criticism  than  the  original  judgment  about  factorization.  I  shall  not 
attempt  to  explain  this  idea  of  ‘intuition’  any  more  explicitly. 

The  exercise  of  ingenuity  in  mathematics  consists  in  aiding  the  intuition  through 
suitable  arrangements  of  propositions,  and  perhaps  geometrical  figures  or  drawings.  It 
is  intended  that  when  these  are  really  well  arranged  the  validity  of  the  intuitive  steps  which 
are  required  cannot  seriously  be  doubted. 

The  parts  played  by  these  two  faculties  differ  of  course  from  occasion  to  occasion,  and 
from  mathematician  to  mathematician.  This  arbitrariness  can  be  removed  by  the  intro¬ 
duction  of  a  formal  logic.  The  necessity  for  using  the  intuition  is  then  greatly  reduced  by 
setting  down  formal  rules  for  carrying  out  inferences  which  are  always  intuitively  valid. 
When  working  with  a  formal  logic,  the  idea  of  ingenuity  takes  a  more  definite  shape.  In 
general  a  formal  logic  will  be  framed  so  as  to  admit  a  considerable  variety  of  possible  steps 
in  any  stage  in  a  proof.  Ingenuity  will  then  determine  which  steps  are  the  more  profitable 
for  the  purpose  of  proving  a  particular  proposition,  (p.  192) 

The  intuition/ingenuity  distinction  is  illustrated  by  the  Gentzen-style  formal 
logic  described  in  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’  (see  the  subsection  ‘A  tutorial 
on  first-order  predicate  calculus’).  Most  people  see  intuitively  that,  for  example, 
the  rule 

X\-  Y 

b  not(X  &  not  Y) 

is  valid.  In  order  to  grasp  that  the  rule  is  valid,  it  is  necessary  only  to  reflect  on 
the  rule’s  meaning,  namely: 

If  Y  can  be  concluded  from  X,  then  it  can  be  concluded  that  not  both  X  and  the 

denial  of  Y  are  true. 

With  only  a  dozen  or  so  basic  rules,  this  formal  logic  places  very  little  demand  on 
intuition.  Once  one  has  accepted  these  few  rules  as  valid,  proofs  can  be 
constructed  in  the  system  without  the  need  for  any  further  exercise  of 
intuition.  Nevertheless,  constructing  proofs  can  place  considerable  strain  on 


136  I  Jack  Copeland 


one’s  ingenuity.  To  form  a  proof  one  must — playing  always  by  the  rules — devise 
a  chain  of  propositions  culminating  in  the  proposition  that  is  to  be  proved.  As 
Turing  remarked,  at  each  point  in  the  chain  there  are  always  various  possibilities 
for  the  next  move.  Typically,  most  of  these  possible  moves  are  of  no  help  at  all, 
and  it  may  require  significant  ingenuity  to  find  a  sequence  of  moves  that  leads  to 
the  desired  conclusion. 

Important  though  ingenuity  is  in  practice,  it  is  in  principle  unnecessary  so 
long  as  unlimited  time  and  paper  are  available.  This  perhaps  surprising  fact  is 
clear  from  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’.  Once  intuition  has  supplied  the  materials 
from  which  proofs  are  to  be  constructed — the  basic  inference  rules,  in  the  case  of 
the  logical  system  under  discussion — then  a  suitably  programmed  Turing  ma¬ 
chine  is  able  to  grind  out  all  the  valid  proofs  of  the  system  one  by  one.  No 
ingenuity  is  required  to  apply  the  rules  of  the  system  blindly,  making  legal  move 
after  legal  move.  If  a  proposition  is  provable  in  the  system  then  a  machine 
operating  in  this  ‘blind’  fashion  will  sooner  or  later  prove  it  (so  long  as  the 
machine  is  programmed  in  such  a  way  that  no  legal  moves  are  missed): 

We  are  always  able  to  obtain  from  the  rules  of  a  formal  logic  a  method  of  enumerating  the 
propositions  proved  by  its  means.  We  then  imagine  that  all  proofs  take  the  form  of  a 
search  through  this  enumeration  for  the  theorem  for  which  a  proof  is  desired.  In  this  way 
ingenuity  is  replaced  by  patience,  (p.  193) 

Intuition,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  be  replaced  by  patience.  This  is  a  lesson 
of  Godel’s  incompleteness  results. 

In  pre-Godel  times  it  was  thought  by  some  that  it  would  probably  be  possible  to  carry  this 
programme  [the  setting  down  of  formal  rules]  to  such  a  point  that  all  the  intuitive 
judgments  of  mathematics  could  be  replaced  by  a  finite  number  of  these  rules.  The 
necessity  for  intuition  would  then  be  entirely  eliminated,  (pp.  192-3) 

Turing  is  here  referring  to  the  Hilbert  programme.  The  Hilbert  programme 
aimed  to  bring  mathematics  to  order  by  setting  down  a  finite  system  of  formal 
rules  (a  ‘concrete  basis  on  which  everyone  can  agree’42)  by  means  of  which  all  the 
infinitely  many  intuitively  true  mathematical  statements  could  be  proved  without 
further  appeals  to  intuition — without  ‘mysterious  arts’,  as  Hilbert  put  it.43  (See 
further  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’.)  Following  Godel,  it  was  clear 
that  this  cannot  be  done.  No  matter  which  rules  are  selected,  there  will 
always  be  statements  that  a  mathematician  can  see  intuitively  are  true  but 
which  cannot  be  proved  using  the  rules. 


42  D.  Hilbert,  ‘Uber  das  Unendliche’  [On  the  Infinite],  Mathematische  Annalen,  95  (1926),  161-90  (180); 
English  translation  by  E.  Putnam  and  G.  Massey  in  R.  L.  Epstein  and  W.  A.  Carnielli,  Computability: 
Computable  Functions,  Logic,  and  the  Foundations  of  Mathematics  (2nd  edn.  Belmont,  Calif.:  Wadsworth, 
2000). 

43  D.  Hilbert,  ‘Probleme  der  Grundlegung  der  Mathematik’  [Problems  Concerning  the  Foundation  of 
Mathematics],  Mathematische  Annalen,  102  (1930),  1-9  (9). 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  137 


While  it  had  been  shown  that  intuition  cannot  be  replaced  by  such  a  system  of 
rules,  there  remained  the  question  whether  it  might  nevertheless  be  possible  to 
circumscribe  the  use  made  of  intuition,  so  that  the  mathematician  is  only 
required  to  use  intuition  in  judging  the  truth  of  (an  unlimited  number  of) 
propositions  of  a  very  specific  form.  This  would  not  achieve  the  elimination  of 
intuition  desired  by  Hilbertians,  but  would  achieve  something  in  that  direction. 
The  truths  of  mathematics  could  be  derived,  not  by  using  a  set  of  formal  rules 
alone,  but  by  using  a  set  of  formal  rules  together  with  intuitive  judgements  of 
that  very  specific  form.  To  those  wary  of  intuition,  this  is  certainly  preferable  to 
the  uncontrolled  use  of  ‘mysterious  arts’.  Although  not  eliminated,  the  use  of 
intuition  would  at  least  be  brought  under  strict  control. 

This  successor  to  the  defeated  Hilbert  programme44  is  the  subject  of  investi¬ 
gation  of  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’: 

In  our  discussions ...  we  have  gone  to  the  opposite  extreme  [to  Hilbertians]  and  elimin¬ 
ated  not  intuition  but  ingenuity,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  our  aim  has  been  in 
much  the  same  direction.  We  have  been  trying  to  see  how  far  it  is  possible  to  eliminate 
intuition,  and  leave  only  ingenuity,  (p.  193) 

In  consequence  of  the  impossibility  of  finding  a  formal  logic  which  wholly  eliminates  the 
necessity  of  using  intuition,  we  naturally  turn  to  ‘non-constructive’  systems  of  logic  with 
which  not  all  the  steps  in  a  proof  are  mechanical,  some  being  intuitive.  . . .  What  proper¬ 
ties  do  we  desire  a  non-constructive  logic  to  have  if  we  are  to  make  use  of  it  for  the 
expression  of  mathematical  proofs?  We  want  it  to  show  quite  clearly  when  a  step  makes 
use  of  intuition,  and  when  it  is  purely  formal.  The  strain  put  on  the  intuition  should  be  a 
minimum,  (ibid.) 

The  following  extension  of  the  Gentzen-style  formal  logic  just  discussed  is  a 
simple  example  of  a  logical  system  that  incorporates,  as  well  as  formal  rules, 
intuitive  judgements  of  a  very  specific  kind.  In  this  extended  system,  each  step  in 
a  proof  is  either  a  derivation  from  previous  statements  in  the  proof,  using  a 
formal  rule  (as  before),  or  else — and  this  is  the  new  part — is  the  assertion  of  a 
(true)  proposition  of  form  ‘Un(m)’.  ‘Un(m)’  is  a  construction  saying  ‘At  some 
point,  Turing  machine  m  prints  0’  (see  Section  1 1  of  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’, 
and  the  subsection  ‘The  proof  of  the  undecidability  of  FOPC’  of  ‘Computable 
Numbers:  A  Guide’).  Steps  of  this  second  sort  are  non-mechanical,  in  the  sense 
that  no  Turing  machine — no  effective  procedure — is  able  to  determine,  for  all 
propositions  of  the  form  ‘Un(m)’,  which  are  true  and  which  false.  Nevertheless, 
when  one  is  proving  theorems  in  this  system,  one  is  allowed  to  include,  at  any 
point  in  a  proof  where  it  is  helpful  to  do  so,  an  intuitively  true  proposition  of  the 
form  ‘Un(m)’.  No  other  type  of  intuitive  step  is  permitted  in  the  system — the 


44  This  post-Godelian  programme  was  also  investigated  by  Church’s  student  Barkley  Rosser  in  his  ‘Godel 
Theorems  for  Non-Constructive  Logics’,  Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic,  2  (1937),  129-37. 


138  I  Jack  Copeland 


strain  put  on  the  intuition  is  ‘a  minimum’.  The  result  is  a  system  whose  theorems 
go  far  beyond  what  is  provable  in  the  first-order  predicate  calculus  alone. 

The  question  of  how  much  mathematics  can  be  captured  by  a  system  in  which 
the  use  of  intuition  is  strictly  controlled  in  this  manner  is  the  crucial  one  for  the 
success  or  otherwise  of  this  post-Hilbertian  programme. 


Ordinal  Logics  and  Godel’s  Incompleteness  Theorem 

To  say  that  a  system  is  complete  with  respect  to  some  specified  set  of  formulae  S, 
e.g.  the  set  of  arithmetical  truths,  is  to  say  that  every  formula  in  S  is  provable  in 
the  system.  Godel  showed  that  not  all  arithmetical  truths  can  be  proved  in  the 
formal  system  of  arithmetic  set  out  by  Whitehead  and  Russell  in  Priticipia 
Mathematica.  Turing’s  work  enabled  this  result  to  be  extended  to  any  mechanical 
procedure  for  producing  truths  of  arithmetic  (see  Section  14  of  ‘Computable 
Numbers:  A  Guide’). 

Godel  established  his  incompleteness  result  by  showing  how  to  construct  an 
arithmetical  formula — call  it  G — that  is  not  provable  in  the  system  and  yet  is 
true.  In  order  to  show  that  G  is  true,  Godel  appealed  to  the  way  he  constructed 
G.  G  is  of  such  a  nature  that  G  in  effect  says  that  it  itself  is  not  provable  in  the 
system — and  so,  since  G  is  not  provable,  what  G  says  is  true. 

Can  the  incomplete  formal  system  of  arithmetic  be  made  complete  by  adding 
G  to  it  as  a  new  axiom  (thereby  making  it  the  case — trivially — that  G  is  provable 
in  the  system)?  No.  This  is  because,  once  G  is  added,  producing  a  new  system,  the 
Godel  construction  can  be  applied  once  again  to  produce  a  true  formula  Gi  that 
is  unprovable  in  the  new  system.  And  when  Gi  is  itself  added  as  a  new  axiom, 
producing  a  further  system,  there  is  a  true  but  unprovable  G>,  and  so  on  ad 
infinitum. 

Following  Turing’s  notation  (p.  146),  let  the  system  of  arithmetic  that  forms 
the  starting  point  of  this  infinite  progression  be  called  L.  The  result  of  adding  G 
to  L  is  called  Ly,  the  result  of  adding  Gi  to  L\  is  L2,  and  so  on.  Taken  together,  the 
systems  in  the  infinite  progression  L,  Lly  L2,  L3,  ...  form  a  non-constructive 
logic  of  the  sort  described  by  Turing  in  the  above  quotation.  New  axioms  are 
seen  to  be  true  by  intuition,  but  otherwise  only  ingenuity  (or  patience)  is 
required  in  proving  theorems  in  any  of  the  systems. 

There  are  a  lot  of  systems  in  the  progression  I,  Li,  L2,  L2,  ...  Saying  merely 
that  there  are  infinitely  many  oversimplifies  matters.  Not  only  is  there  a  system 
for  each  one  of  the  infinitely  many  finite  ordinal  numbers  1,  2,  3,  . . .  There  is  a 
system  that  contains  the  theorems  of  every  one  of  the  systems  L*,  where  i  is  a 
finite  ordinal.  This  system  is  called  Lw  (w  being  the  first  ‘transfinite’  ordinal 
number).  The  system  Lw  is  ‘bigger’  than  any  one  of  the  systems  Lj  in  the  sense 
that,  no  matter  which  L,  is  considered,  Lw  includes  all  the  theorems  of  L„  but  not 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  139 


vice  versa.  If  Pi  is  the  set  of  provable  formulae  of  Lt ,  P2  of  L2,  and  so  on,  then  Pu 
is  the  union  of  all  the  sets  Pi,  P2,  P3,  . . .  But  even  La  has  a  true  but  unprovable 
Gw.  Adding  GM  to  PM  produces  Lw+i,  adding  Gw+i  to  Lm+ 1  produces  Lw+ 2,  and  so 
on  and  so  on.  The  progression  of  systems  L,  Li,  L2,  P3,  . . .  ,PM,  iM+i»  LM+2>  ■  ■  ■ 
is  an  example  of  an  ordinal  logic. 

As  Turing  noted  in  the  first  paragraph  of  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’, 
each  Li  is  ‘more  complete’  than  its  predecessor:  some  of  the  true  formulae 
unprovable  in  L  are  provable  in  the  less  incomplete  L2,  and  so  on.  This  raises 
the  possibility  of  our  being  able  to  construct  a  progression  of  systems — an 
ordinal  logic — that  is  complete,  the  systems  in  the  progression  proving  between 
them  all  the  truths  of  arithmetic.  If  so,  then  not  every  systematic  formulation  of 
arithmetic  falls  prey  to  Godel’s  theorem.  Such  an  ordinal  logic  would  ‘avoid  as 
far  as  possible  the  effects  of  Godel’s  theorem’,  Turing  said  (p.  178): 

Godel’s  theorem  shows  that  such  a  system  cannot  be  wholly  mechanical;  but  with  a 
complete  ordinal  logic  we  should  be  able  to  confine  the  non-mechanical  steps . . .  (p.  180) 

In  his  investigations  Turing  considered  sequences  of  systems  in  which  the  non¬ 
mechanical  steps  consist,  not  of  recognizing  that  Godel-formulae  (the  Gs)  are 
true,  but  of  recognizing  that  certain  formulae  are  what  he  called  ordinal  formu¬ 
lae.  The  concept  of  an  ordinal  formula  is  defined  in  terms  of  operations  of  the 
lambda  calculus  (p.  162).  Roughly,  a  formula  of  the  lambda  calculus  is  an  ordinal 
formula  if  it  represents  a  (constructive)  ordinal  number.  The  important  point 
is  that  there  is  no  effective  procedure  for  determining,  of  any  given  formula 
of  the  calculus,  whether  or  not  it  is  an  ordinal  formula;  Turing  proved  this 
on  p.  170. 

Turing  gave  examples  of  ordinal  logics  of  three  different  types,  the  logic  Ap 
(p.  177),  the  logic  AH  (p.  178),  and  his  ‘Gentzen  type’  ordinal  logics  (Section 
12).45  (The  ‘P’  in  ‘Ap’  refers  to  Godel’s  1931  system  P,  equivalent  to  the  system  of 
arithmetic  given  by  Whitehead  and  Russell  in  Principia  Mathematica.  Seemingly 
‘Pf  was  for  Hilbert.) 


Ordinal  Logics  and  Proof-Finding  Machines 

In  one  of  his  letters  to  Newman  (Chapter  4),  Turing  outlined  the  relationship 
between  an  ordinal  logic  and  a  hierarchy  of  theorem-proving  Turing  machines 
(p.  215): 

One  imagines  different  machines  allowing  different  sets  of  proofs,  and  by  choosing  a 
suitable  machine  one  can  approximate  ‘truth’  by  ‘provability’  better  than  with  a  less 
suitable  machine,  and  can  in  a  sense  approximate  it  as  well  as  you  please. 


45  The  ‘Gentzen-type’  logics  of  Section  12  are  different  from  the  Gentzen-style  formulation  of  first-order 
predicate  calculus  discussed  above  (although,  as  the  names  imply,  both  are  suggested  by  work  of  Gentzen). 


140  I  Jack  Copeland 


If  one  wants  a  particular  true  statement  to  be  proved  by  a  Turing  machine  (in  the 
sense  described  earlier,  where  ‘ingenuity  is  replaced  by  patience’),  then,  since  no 
single  Turing  machine  can  prove  every  true  arithmetical  statement,  one  must 
pick  a  suitable  machine,  a  machine  that  actually  is  able  to  prove  the  statement 
in  question.  The  selection  of  a  suitable  machine  typically  ‘involves  intuition’ 
(p.  215). 

The  intuition  involved  in  choosing  a  suitable  proof-finding  machine  is,  Turing 
went  on  to  say  in  the  letter,  ‘interchangeable’  with  the  intuition  required 
for  selecting  a  system,  from  among  a  progression  of  systems,  in  which  the 
statement  is  provable.  Furthermore,  if  rather  than  following  the  rules  of 
a  particular  logical  system,  one  were  to  prove  the  statement  free-style,  then  this 
too  would  require  intuition,  and  the  necessary  intuition  would  be  inter¬ 
changeable  with  that  required  for  choosing  a  suitable  proof-finding  machine 
or  for  choosing  a  suitable  logical  system.  (See  further  the  introduction  to 
Chapter  12.) 


Completeness  of  Ordinal  Logics 

Let  l\,  h,  h,  ■  ■  ■  be  any  progression  of  logical  systems  indexed  by  (expressions 
for)  ordinals.  To  say  that  l\,  I2,  h,  ■  ■  ■  is  complete  with  respect  to  some  set  of 
formulae  S  is  to  say  that  for  each  formula  x  in  S,  there  is  some  ordinal  a  such  that 
x  is  provable  in  la. 

Turing  proved  the  following  ‘completeness  theorem’:  his  ordinal  logic  A p 
is  complete  with  respect  to  the  set  of  all  true  formulae  of  the  form  ‘for  every 
integer  x,  f{x)  =  O’,  where  /  is  a  primitive  recursive  function  (pp.  187-190). 
Many  mathematically  interesting  theorems  are  of  this  form.  In  modern  termin¬ 
ology,  formulae  of  this  form  are  called  ‘IT^  formulae’.  Turing  referred  to  them  as 
being  of  the  form  ‘/(x)  vanishes  identically’  (by  ‘/(x)  vanishes’  is  meant 
‘/(x)  =  O’). 

This  completeness  theorem  shows  that  Ap  circumvents  Godel’s  incomplete¬ 
ness  result  in  the  way  discussed  above.  Solomon  Feferman,  who  in  the  1960s 
continued  Turing’s  work  on  ordinal  logics,  commented  on  the  theorem:  ‘[This] 
partial  completeness  result . . .  could  have  been  regarded  as  meeting  the . . .  aim  of 
“overcoming”  the  incompleteness  phenomena  discovered  by  Godel,  since  these 
only  concerned  true  but  unprovable  IT°  statements.’46 

In  his  letter  to  Newman  from  the  Crown  (Chapter  4),  Turing  pointed  out  that 
this  ‘completeness  theorem ...  is  of  course  completely  useless  for  the  purpose  of 
actually  producing  proofs’  (p.  213).  Why  this  is  so  is  explained  by  means  of  an 
example  in  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’  (p.  191): 


46  S.  Feferman,  ‘Turing  in  the  Land  of  O(z)’,  in  R.  Herken  (ed.),  The  Universal  Turing  Machine:  A  Half- 
Century  Survey  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1988),  122-3. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  141 


Although  [the  completeness  theorem]  shows,  for  instance,  that  it  is  possible  to  prove 
Fermat’s  last  theorem  with  AP  (if  it  is  true)  yet  the  truth  of  the  theorem  would  really  be 
assumed  by  taking  a  certain  formula  as  an  ordinal  formula. 

Nevertheless,  as  Turing  went  on  to  say  in  the  letter,  the  completeness  theorem  does 
succeed  perfectly  well  in  its  purpose  of  providing  ‘an  insurance  against  certain 
sorts  of  “Godel  incompleteness  theorems”  being  proved  about  the  ordinal  logic’. 

Not  all  true  arithmetical  statements  are  of  11°  form  (this  is  why  the  completeness 
theorem  is  only  a  partial  result).  Turing  was  especially  concerned  with  formulae 
of  the  form  ( x)(3y)f(x ,  y)  =  0  (where  /  is  a  primitive  recursive  function).  In 
modern  terminology,  formulae  of  this  form  are  called  ‘11°  formulae’.  Turing  called 
(true)  formulae  of  this  form  ‘number-theoretic  theorems’  (p.  152).  (The  choice  of 
this  term  is  curious;  he  defended  it  in  a  footnote  to  p.  152.)  In  Section  5,  Turing 
explained  why  he  regarded  number-theoretic  theorems  as  having  ‘an  importance 
which  makes  it  worth  while  to  give  them  special  consideration’  (mentioning  also, 
on  p.  155,  that  a  number  of  unsolved  mathematical  problems  are  number- theor¬ 
etic).  Turing  conjectured  that  A p  is  complete  with  respect  to  the  set  of  all  true  11° 
formulae,  but  said  ‘I  cannot  at  present  give  a  proof  of  this’  (p.  187). 

Unfortunately  Turing’s  conjecture  that  AP  is  complete  with  respect  to  true  11° 
formulae  was  proved  incorrect  by  Feferman,  in  work  published  in  1962.47  Is 
there  nevertheless  some  ordinal  logic  that  is  complete  with  respect  to  this  wider 
class  of  truths?  A  negative  answer  would  represent  a  spectacular  incompleteness 
result.  Commenting  on  his  refutation  of  Turing’s  conjecture,  Feferman  said: 

A  general  incompleteness  theorem  for  recursive  progressions . . .  would  have  been  dramatic 
proof  of  the  far-reaching  extent  of  incompleteness  phenomena.  However,  the  situation  has 
not  turned  out  in  this  way.  ...  [A]  11  true  sentences  of  elementary  number  theory  are 
provable  in  the  recursive  progression  based  on  [a  principle  studied  by  Shoenfield] ,48 

At  the  end  of  Section  11,  Turing  gave  some  reasons  for  being  dissatisfied  with 
the  logics  Ah  and  Ap,  and  moved  on  to  the  Gentzen-type  ordinal  logics  of 
Section  12.  He  said  of  the  last  of  his  three  examples  of  Gentzen-type  logics,  AG3, 
that  it  ‘appears  to  be  adequate  for  most  purposes’,  adding  ‘How  far  this  is  the  case 
can,  of  course,  only  be  determined  by  experiment’  (p.  202). 


Oracle  Machines 

In  Section  4,  ‘A  type  of  problem  which  is  not  number-theoretic’,  Turing  intro¬ 
duced  the  concept  of  an  o-machine.  An  o-machine  is  like  a  Turing  machine 


47  S.  Feferman,  ‘Transfinite  Recursive  Progressions  of  Axiomatic  Theories’,  Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic,  27 
(1962),  259-316. 

48  Ibid.  261;  J.  R.  Shoenfield,  ‘On  a  Restricted  w-Rule',  Bulletin  de  VAcademie  Polonaise  des  Sciences,  7 
(1959),  405-7. 


142  I  Jack  Copeland 


except  that  the  machine  is  endowed  with  an  additional  basic  operation  of  a  type 
that  no  Turing  machine  can  simulate.  For  example,  the  new  operation  may  be 
that  of  displaying  the  answer  to  any  question  of  the  form  ‘Is  Turing  machine  m 
circle-free?’  (A  circle-free  machine  is  one  that  prints  an  infinite  number  of  binary 
digits;  see  Sections  8  and  11  of ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’.)  Turing  called 
the  new  operation  the  ‘oracle’.  He  did  not  go  into  the  nature  of  the  oracle:  it 
works  by  ‘some  unspecified  means’  (p.  156). 

The  question  ‘Is  Turing  machine  m  circle-free?’  may  be  presented  to  the  oracle 
simply  by  writing  out,  on  successive  F-squares  of  the  o-machine’s  tape,  the  descrip¬ 
tion  number  of  the  Turing  machine  in  question  (marking  the  E-squares  at  the  start 
and  finish  of  the  description  number  with  some  special  symbol,  e.g.  ‘@’).  As  in  the 
case  of  an  ordinary  Turing  machine,  the  behaviour  of  an  o-machine  is  governed  by 
a  table  of  instructions.  Among  the  states  of  the  o-machine  is  a  state  that  is  used  to 
call  in  the  oracle.  When  an  instruction  in  the  table  places  the  machine  in  that  state, 
the  marked  description  is  ‘referred  to  the  oracle’  (p.  1 56) .  The  oracle  determines  by 
unspecified  means  whether  or  not  the  Turing  machine  so  numbered  is  circle-free, 
and  delivers  its  pronouncement  by  shifting  the  machine  into  one  or  other  of  two 
states,  one  indicating  the  affirmative  answer  and  the  other  the  negative. 

Turing’s  aim  in  Section  4,  paralleling  his  aim  in  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’, 
was  to  prove  the  existence  of  mathematical  problems  that  cannot  be  solved  by 
o-machine.  Just  as  no  Turing  machine  can  decide,  of  arbitrarily  selected  Turing- 
machine  description  numbers,  which  are  numbers  of  circle-free  machines,  no 
o-machine  can  decide,  of  arbitrarily  selected  o-machine  description  numbers, 
which  are  numbers  of  circle-free  o-machines.  Turing  showed  this  by  reworking 
the  argument  that  he  gave  in  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’  (p.  72ff  of  ‘On 
Computable  Numbers’  and  p.  157  of ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’). 

The  connection  with  number-theoretic  problems  is  via  an  equivalence  pointed 
out  by  Turing  in  Section  3:  ‘every  number-theoretic  theorem  is  equivalent  to  the 
statement  that  a  corresponding  [Turing]  machine  is  circle  free’  (p.  154).  In  the 
light  of  this  equivalence,  an  oracle  for  deciding  whether  or  not  Turing  machines 
are  circle-free  is  in  effect  an  oracle  for  deciding  whether  or  not  statements  are 
number- theoretic  theorems.  (Indeed,  Turing  introduced  o-machines  in  terms  of 
an  oracle  for  ‘solving  number-theoretic  problems’  (p.  156).) 

Given  that  an  o-machine  is  able  to  solve  all  number-theoretic  problems,  the 
o-machine  satisfactoriness  problem — the  problem  of  deciding  whether  arbitrar¬ 
ily  selected  o-machine  description  numbers  are  numbers  of  circle-free  ma¬ 
chines — is  an  example  of  a  type  of  problem  that  is  not  number-theoretic. 

Turing  has  shown,  then,  that  there  are  types  of  mathematical  truth  that  cannot 
be  proved  by  means  of  an  effective  method  augmented  by  pronouncements  of 
the  oracle.  If  the  project  is  to  formalize  mathematics  by  means  of  Hilbertian 
inference  rules  augmented  by  a  strictly  circumscribed  use  of  intuition,  then  the 
intuitive  steps  cannot  be  limited  to  true  propositions  of  the  form  ‘Turing 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  143 

machine  m  is  circle-free’.  Equivalently,  the  intuitive  steps  cannot  be  limited  to 
number-theoretic  theorems. 

In  Section  9,  Turing  generalized  his  oracle-machine  argument,  considering 
ordinal  logics  that  ‘prove  more  general  theorems  than  number-theoretic  ones’ 
(p.  179).  An  ordinal  logic  itself  provides  the  materials  for  the  formulation,  via  the 
oracle-machine  construction,  of  a  problem  that  it  cannot  solve.  Consider  an  oracle 
for  a  class  of  problems  more  extensive  than  the  number- theoretic  problems,  and  let 
the  notion  of  an  o- machine  be  broadened  to  include  machines  availing  themselves 
of  this  oracle.  It  can  be  shown,  by  the  same  form  of  argument  as  before,  that  there  are 
problems  ‘which  cannot  be  solved  by  a  uniform  process  even  with  the  help  of  this 
oracle’  (p.  180).  Thus  there  are  true  mathematical  statements  not  provable  in  an 
ordinal  logic  in  which  all  the  intuitive  steps  correspond  to  pronouncements  of  the 
oracle. 

This  negative  result  of  Turing’s  exposes  the  limitations  of  the  post-Hilbertian 
programme  that  is  his  focus,  just  as  his  attack  in  ‘On  Computable  Numbers’ 
exposed  the  limitations  of  Hilbert’s  own  programme.  Turing  tempered  this 
negative  result  with  the  pragmatic  view  that  an  appropriate  ordinal  logic  (per¬ 
haps  A(j3)  would  be  ‘adequate  for  most  purposes’  (p.  202). 


Generalized  Recursion  Theory  and  Degrees  of  Unsolvability 

The  oracle-machine  concept  has  in  fact  had  a  considerably  greater  impact  on 
mathematical  logic  than  the  parent  concept  of  an  ordinal  logic.  Turing’s  introduc¬ 
tion  of  the  o-machine  led  to  the  development  of  the  rich  and  important  field  of 
mathematical  logic  known  as  generalized  recursion  theory.  Generalized  recursion 
theory  extends  the  concept  of  an  algorithm.  In  his  textbook  Degrees  of  Unsolvabil¬ 
ity  Joseph  Shoenfield  introduces  the  field  in  this  way: 

We  extend  the  notion  of  an  algorithm  to  allow  the  use  of  oracles.  The  extension  consists  of 
allowing  a  new  instruction  to  appear  in  the  algorithm.  This  new  instruction  tells  us  that 
the  next  computation  step  is  to  be  the  value  given  by  the  oracle  for  the  argument  obtained 
at  the  last  computation  step.49 

Much  of  the  credit  for  laying  the  foundations  of  generalized  recursion  theory 
belongs  to  Emil  Post,  who  in  the  1940s  further  developed  what  Turing  had  begun 
in  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’.50  In  1944  Post  introduced  the  term 
‘Turing-reducible’  into  the  literature,  saying  that  the  decision  problem  for  a 
(recursively  enumerable)  set  of  positive  integers  A — i.e.  the  problem  of  correctly 


49  J.  R.  Shoenfield,  Degrees  of  Unsolvability  (Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1971),  15. 

50  E.  L.  Post,  ‘Recursively  Enumerable  Sets  of  Positive  Integers  and  their  Decision  Problems’,  Bulletin  of 
the  American  Mathematical  Society,  50  (1944),  284-316;  E.  L.  Post,  ‘Recursive  Unsolvability  of  a  Problem  of 
Thue’,  Journal  of  Symbolic  Logic,  12  (1947),  1—11;  E.  L.  Post,  ‘Degrees  of  Recursive  Unsolvability  -  Preliminary 
Report’,  Bulletin  of  the  American  Mathematical  Society,  54  (1948),  641-2. 


144  I  Jack  Copeland 


answering  the  question  ‘Is  x  in  A?’  for  each  positive  integer  x — is  Turing-redu¬ 
cible  to  the  decision  problem  for  a  (recursively  enumerable)  set  of  positive 
integers  B  when  the  first  problem  is  solvable  by  an  o-machine  with  an  oracle 
for  solving  the  second.51  If  the  decision  problem  for  A  is  Turing-reducible  to 
the  decision  problem  for  B,  A  is  said  to  be  computable  relative  to  B. 

In  the  same  article  Post  introduced  the  concept  of  degrees  of  unsolvability.  It  is 
natural  to  think  of  the  problems  that  are  solvable  by  an  o-machine  as  being 
harder  than  those  solvable  by  a  Turing  machine  unaided  by  an  oracle.  Problems 
solvable  by  an  unaided  Turing  machine  are  said  to  be  of  the  lowest  degree. 
Problems  of  equal  hardness  are  said  to  be  of  the  same  degree. 

o-machines  whose  oracle  answers  questions  of  the  form  ‘Is  Turing  machine  m 
circle-free?’  are  sometimes  called  first-order  oracle  machines.  Problems  that  are 
solvable  by  an  o-machine  whose  oracle  answers  questions  of  the  form  ‘Is  first- 
order  o-machine  m  circle-free?’ — a  second-order  o-machine — are  of  a  higher 
degree  than  (harder  than)  problems  solvable  by  first-order  o-machines.  Problems 
that  are  solvable  by  a  third-order  o-machine  are  of  a  higher  degree  again  than 
problems  solvable  by  a  second- order  o-machine,  and  so  on. 

Post  wrote: 

For  unsolvable  problems  the  concept  of  reducibility  leads  to  the  concept  of  degree  of 
unsolvability ,  two  unsolvable  problems  being  of  the  same  degree  of  unsolvability  if  each  is 
reducible  to  the  other,  one  of  lower  degree  of  unsolvability  than  another  if  it  is  reducible 
to  the  other,  but  that  other  is  not  reducible  to  it,  of  incomparable  degrees  of  unsolvability 
if  neither  is  reducible  to  the  other.52 

Post  called  problems  other  than  those  of  the  lowest  degree  ‘unsolvable’  (Turing 
comments  on  this  terminology  in  Chapter  17).  He  pointed  out  that,  in  Section  4 
of  ‘Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals’,  Turing  proved  ‘a  result  which  immedi¬ 
ately  generalizes  to  the  result  that  for  any  “recursively  given”  unsolvable  problem 
there  is  another  of  higher  degree  of  unsolvability’.53 

In  the  modern  literature  the  degrees  of  unsolvability  generated  by  Turing- 
reducibility  are  known  simply  as  Turing  degrees.54 


Further  reading 

Barendregt,  H.  P.,  The  Lambda-Calculus,  its  Syntax  and  Semantics  (Amsterdam:  North- 
Holland,  1984). 

Davis,  M.,  Computability  and  Unsolvability  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1958). 

51  ‘Recursively  Enumerable  Sets  of  Positive  Integers  and  their  Decision  Problems’,  311. 

52  Ibid.  289. 

53  Ibid.  289-90. 

54  I  am  grateful  to  Peter  Hilton  and  Gualtiero  Piccinini  for  their  comments  on  a  draff  of  this  introduc¬ 


tion. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  145 


Feferman,  S.,  ‘Turing  in  the  Land  of  O(z)’,  in  R.  Herken  (ed.),  The  Universal  Turing 
Machine:  A  Half-Century  Survey  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1988). 

Kleene,  S.  C.,  Mathematical  Logic  (New  York:  Wiley,  1967). 

Rogers,  H.,  Theory  of  Recursive  Functions  and  Effective  Computability  (New  York:  McGraw- 
Hill,  1967). 

Shoenfield,  J.  R.,  Degrees  of  Unsolvability  (Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1971). 

Simpson,  S.  G.,  ‘Degrees  of  Unsolvability:  A  Survey  of  Results’,  in  J.  Barwise  (ed.). 
Handbook  of  Mathematical  Logic  (Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1977). 

Soare,  R.  I.,  Recursively  Enumerable  Sets  and  Degrees  (Berlin:  Springer- Verlag,  1987). 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals 


Introduction  146 

1.  The  conversion  calculus.  Godel  representations  147 

2.  Effective  calculability.  Abbreviation  of  treatment  150 

3.  Number-theoretic  theorems  152 

4.  A  type  of  problem  which  is  not  number-theoretic  156 

5.  Syntactical  theorems  as  number-theoretic  theorems  157 

6.  Logic  formulae  158 

7.  Ordinals  161 

8.  Ordinal  logics  170 

9.  Completeness  questions  178 

10.  The  continuum  hypothesis.  A  digression  191 

11.  The  purpose  of  ordinal  logics  192 

12.  Gentzen  type  ordinal  logics  194 
Index  of  definitions  202 
Bibliography  203 


The  well-known  theorem  of  Godel  (Godel  [1],  [2])  shows  that  every  system  of 
logic  is  in  a  certain  sense  incomplete,  but  at  the  same  time  it  indicates  means 
whereby  from  a  system  L  of  logic  a  more  complete  system  ll  may  be  obtained. 1 
By  repeating  the  process  we  get  a  sequence  L,  L\  =  L',  Li  =  L\  ,  . . .  each  more 
complete  than  the  preceding.  A  logic  Lw  may  then  be  constructed  in  which  the 
provable  theorems  are  the  totality  of  theorems  provable  with  the  help  of  the 
logics  L,  L\,  L2,  .. .  We  may  then  form  L2M  related  to  Lw  in  the  same  way  as  LM 
was  related  to  L.  Proceeding  in  this  way  we  can  associate  a  system  of  logic  with 
any  constructive  ordinal.2  It  may  be  asked  whether  a  sequence  of  logics  of  this 
kind  is  complete  in  the  sense  that  to  any  problem  A  there  corresponds  an 
ordinal  a  such  that  A  is  solvable  by  means  of  the  logic  La.  I  propose  to 
investigate  this  question  in  a  rather  more  general  case,  and  to  give  some 
other  examples  of  ways  in  which  systems  of  logic  may  be  associated  with 
constructive  ordinals. 


This  article  first  appeared  in  Proceedings  of  the  London  Mathematical  Society,  Series  2,  45  (1939), 
161-228.  It  is  reprinted  with  the  permission  of  the  London  Mathematical  Society  and  the  Estate  of  Alan 
Turing. 

1  This  paper  represents  work  done  while  a  Jane  Eliza  Procter  Visiting  Fellow  at  Princeton  University, 
where  the  author  received  most  valuable  advice  and  assistance  from  Prof.  Alonzo  Church. 

2  The  situation  is  not  quite  so  simple  as  is  suggested  by  this  crude  argument.  See  pages  [162-73], 
[181-3]. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  147 


1.  The  calculus  of  conversion.  Godel  representations 

It  will  be  convenient  to  be  able  to  use  the  “conversion  calculus”  of  Church  for  the 
description  of  functions  and  for  some  other  purposes.  This  will  make  greater 
clarity  and  simplicity  of  expression  possible.  I  give  a  short  account  of  this 
calculus.  For  detailed  descriptions  see  Church  [3],  [2],  Kleene  [1],  Church  and 
Rosser  [1], 

The  formulae  of  the  calculus  are  formed  from  the  symbols  {,  },(,),  [,  ],  \,  8, 
and  an  infinite  list  of  others  called  variables;  we  shall  take  for  our  infinite  list 
a,  b,  . . . ,  z,  x',  x",  . . .  Certain  finite  sequences  of  such  symbols  are  called  well- 
formed  formulae  (abbreviated  to  W.F.F.);  we  define  this  class  inductively, 
and  define  simultaneously  the  free  and  the  bound  variables  of  a  W.F.F.  Any 
variable  is  a  W.F.F.;  it  is  its  only  free  variable,  and  it  has  no  bound  variables.  8  is  a 
W.F.F.  and  has  no  free  or  bound  variables.  If  M  and  N  are  W.F.F.  then  {M}(N)  is  a 
W.F.F.,  whose  free  variables  are  the  free  variables  of  M  together  with  the  free 
variables  of  N,  and  whose  bound  variables  are  the  bound  variables  of  M  together 
with  those  of  N.  If  M  is  a  W.F.F.  and  V  is  one  of  its  free  variables,  then  XV[M]  is  a 
W.F.F.  whose  free  variables  are  those  of  M  with  the  exception  of  V,  and  whose 
bound  variables  are  those  of  M  together  with  V.  No  sequence  of  symbols  is  a 
W.F.F.  except  in  consequence  of  these  three  statements. 

In  metamathematical  statements  we  use  heavy  type  letters  to  stand  for  variable 
or  undetermined  formulae,  as  was  done  in  the  last  paragraph,  and  in  future  such 
letters  will  stand  for  well-formed  formulae  unless  otherwise  stated.  Small  letters 
in  heavy  type  will  stand  for  formulae  representing  undetermined  positive  inte¬ 
gers  (see  below). 

AW.F.F.  is  said  to  be  in  normal  form  if  it  has  no  parts  of  the  form  |XV[M]  }(N) 
and  none  of  the  form  {{8}(M)}(N),  where  M  and  N  have  no  free  variables. 

We  say  that  one  W.F.F.  is  immediately  convertible  into  another  if  it  is  obtained 
from  it  either  by: 

(i)  Replacing  one  occurrence  of  a  well-formed  part  A.V[M]  by  \U[N],  where 
the  variable  U  does  not  occur  in  M,  and  N  is  obtained  from  M  by 
replacing  the  variable  V  by  U  throughout. 

(ii)  Replacing  a  well-formed  part  JXV[M]}(N)  by  the  formula  which  is 
obtained  from  M  by  replacing  V  by  N  throughout,  provided  that  the 
bound  variables  of  M  are  distinct  both  from  V  and  from  the  free  variables 
of  N. 

(iii)  The  process  inverse  to  (ii). 

(iv)  Replacing  a  well-formed  part  {{8}(M)}(M)  by 

\/[\x[{/}({/}(x))]] 
if  M  is  in  normal  form  and  has  no  free  variables. 


148  I  Alan  Turing 

(v)  Replacing  a  well-formed  part  {{8}(M)}(N)  by 

\/[\4  {/}(*)]] 

if  M  and  N  are  in  normal  form,  are  not  transformable  into  one  another  by 
repeated  application  of  (i),  and  have  no  free  variables. 

(vi)  The  process  inverse  to  (iv). 

(vii)  The  process  inverse  to  (v). 

These  rules  could  have  been  expressed  in  such  a  way  that  in  no  case  could 
there  be  any  doubt  about  the  admissibility  or  the  result  of  the  transformation  [in 
particular  this  can  be  done  in  the  case  of  process  (v)]. 

A  formula  A  is  said  to  be  convertible  into  another  B  (abbreviated  to  “A  conv 
B”)  if  there  is  a  finite  chain  of  immediate  conversions  leading  from  one  formula 
to  the  other.  It  is  easily  seen  that  the  relation  of  convertibility  is  an  equivalence 
relation,  i.e.  it  is  symmetric,  transitive,  and  reflexive. 

Since  the  formulae  are  liable  to  be  very  lengthy,  we  need  means  for  abbreviat¬ 
ing  them.  If  we  wish  to  introduce  a  particular  letter  as  an  abbreviation  for  a 
particular  lengthy  formula  we  write  the  letter  followed  by  and  then  by  the 
formula,  thus 

I  — >  Ax[x] 

indicates  that  I  is  an  abbreviation  for  Ajc[x].  We  also  use  the  arrow  in  less  sharply 
defined  senses,  but  never  so  as  to  cause  any  real  confusion.  In  these  cases  the 
meaning  of  the  arrow  may  be  rendered  by  the  words  “stands  for”. 

If  a  formula  F  is,  or  is  represented  by,  a  single  symbol  we  abbreviate  {F} (X)  to 
F(X).  A  formula  { {F} (X) } ( Y)  may  be  abbreviated  to 

{F}(X,  Y), 

or  to  F(X,  Y)  if  F  is,  or  is  represented  by,  a  single  symbol.  Similarly  for 
{{{F}(X)}(Y)}(Z),  etc.  A  formula  XV,  [XV  2  . . .  [\Vr[M]]  . . .]  maybe  abbreviated 
to  XVf V, . . .  Vr .  M. 

We  have  not  as  yet  assigned  any  meanings  to  our  formulae,  and  we  do  not 
intend  to  do  so  in  general.  An  exception  may  be  made  for  the  case  of  the  positive 
integers,  which  are  very  conveniently  represented  by  the  formulae 
\fx.f{x),  kfx  •/(/(*))>  ...  In  fact  we  introduce  the  abbreviations 

1  ->  kfx.f(x) 

2  -»•  kfx.f(f(x)) 

3  ->•  kfx.f(f(f(x))),  etc., 

and  we  also  say,  for  example,  that  kfx .  f(f(x)),  or  in  full 

\f[M{/}({/K*))]]> 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  149 


represents  the  positive  integer  2.  Later  we  shall  allow  certain  formulae  to 
represent  ordinals,  but  otherwise  we  leave  them  without  explicit  meaning;  an 
implicit  meaning  may  be  suggested  by  the  abbreviations  used.  In  any  case  where 
any  meaning  is  assigned  to  formulae  it  is  desirable  that  the  meaning  should  be 
invariant  under  conversion.  Our  definitions  of  the  positive  integers  do  not 
violate  this  requirement,  since  it  may  be  proved  that  no  two  formulae  represent¬ 
ing  different  positive  integers  are  convertible  the  one  into  the  other. 

In  connection  with  the  positive  integers  we  introduce  the  abbreviation 

S  Xufx.f(u(f  x)). 

This  formula  has  the  property  that,  if  n  represents  a  positive  integer,  S(n)  is 
convertible  to  a  formula  representing  its  successor.3 

Formulae  representing  undetermined  positive  integers  will  be  represented  by 
small  letters  in  heavy  type,  and  we  adopt  once  for  all  the  convention  that,  if  a 
small  letter,  n  say,  stands  for  a  positive  integer,  then  the  same  letter  in  heavy  type, 
n,  stands  for  the  formula  representing  the  positive  integer.  When  no  confusion 
arises  from  so  doing,  we  shall  not  trouble  to  distinguish  between  an  integer  and 
the  formula  which  represents  it. 

Suppose  that  f(n)  is  a  function  of  positive  integers  taking  positive  integers  as 
values,  and  that  there  is  a  W.F.F.  F  not  containing  8  such  that,  for  each  positive 
integer  n,  F(n)  is  convertible  to  the  formula  representing  f(n).  We  shall  then  say 
that  f(n)  is  X-definable  or  formally  definable,  and  that  F  formally  defines  f(n). 
Similar  conventions  are  used  for  functions  of  more  than  one  variable.  The  sum 
function  is,  for  instance,  formally  defined  by  Xabfx  .  a(fi  b(fi  x));  in  fact,  for  any 
positive  integers  m,  n,  p  for  which  m  +  n  =  p,  we  have 

{Xabfx.  a(f,  b(f  x))}(m,  n)  conv  p. 

In  order  to  emphasize  this  relation  we  introduce  the  abbreviation 
X  +  Y  — >  {Xabfx.  a(f,  b(f,  x))}(X,  Y) 

and  we  shall  use  similar  notations  for  sums  of  three  or  more  terms,  products,  etc. 

For  any  W.F.F.  G  we  shall  say  that  G  enumerates  the  sequence  G(l),  G(2),  . . . 
and  any  other  sequence  whose  terms  are  convertible  to  those  of  this  sequence. 

When  a  formula  is  convertible  to  another  which  is  in  normal  form,  the  second  is 
described  as  a  normal  form  of  the  first,  which  is  then  said  to  have  a  normal  form.  I 
quote  here  some  of  the  more  important  theorems  concerning  normal  forms. 

(A)  If  a  formula  has  two  normal  forms  they  are  convertible  into  one  another  by 
the  use  of  (i)  alone.  (Church  and  Rosser  [1],  479,  481.) 

(B)  If  a  formula  has  a  normal  form  then  every  well-formed  part  of  it  has  a 
normal  form.  (Church  and  Rosser  [1],  480-481.) 


3  This  follows  from  (A)  below. 


150  I  Alan  Turing 


(C)  There  is  ( demonstrably )  no  process  whereby  it  can  be  said  of  a  formula 
whether  it  has  a  normal  form.  (Church  [3],  360,  Theorem  XVIII.) 


We  often  need  to  be  able  to  describe  formulae  by  means  of  positive  integers. 
The  method  used  here  is  due  to  Godel  (Godel  [  1  ] ).  To  each  single  symbol  s  of  the 
calculus  we  assign  an  integer  r[s]  as  in  the  table  below. 


s 

{,  (,  or  [ 

1,  ),  or  ] 

X 


a 

z 

V 

x" 

V" 

r[s] 










If  Si ,  52,  . . . ,  Sk  is  a  sequence  of  symbols,  then  2r[sii3r[52]  . . .  (where  pk  is 
the  k-th  prime  number)  is  called  the  Godel  representation  (G.R.)  of  that  sequence 
of  symbols.  No  two  W.F.F.  have  the  same  G.R. 

Two  theorems  on  G.R.  of  W.F.F.  are  quoted  here. 

(D)  There  is  a  W.F.F.  “form”  such  that  if  a  is  the  G.R.  of  a  W.F.F.  A  without 
free  variables,  then  form  (a)  conv  A.  (This  follows  from  a  similar  theorem 
to  be  found  in  Church  [3],  53  66.  Metads  are  used  there  in  place  of  G.R.) 

(E)  There  is  a  W.F.F.  Gr  such  that,  if  A  is  a  W.F.F.  with  a  normal  form  without 
free  variables,  then  Gr(A)  conv  a,  where  a  is  the  G.R.  of  a  normal  form  of  A. 
[Church  [3],  53,  66,  as  (D).] 


2.  Effective  calculability.  Abbreviation  of  treatment 

A  function  is  said  to  be  “effectively  calculable”  if  its  values  can  be  found  by  some 
purely  mechanical  process.  Although  it  is  fairly  easy  to  get  an  intuitive  grasp  of 
this  idea,  it  is  nevertheless  desirable  to  have  some  more  definite,  mathematically 
expressible  definition.  Such  a  definition  was  first  given  by  Godel  at  Princeton  in 
1934  (Godel  [2],  26),  following  in  part  an  unpublished  suggestion  of  Flerbrand, 
and  has  since  been  developed  by  Kleene  [2]).  These  functions  were  described  as 
“general  recursive”  by  Godel.  We  shall  not  be  much  concerned  here  with  this 
particular  definition.  Another  definition  of  effective  calculability  has  been  given 
by  Church  (Church  [3],  356-358),  who  identifies  it  with  X-definability.  The 
author  has  recently  suggested  a  definition  corresponding  more  closely  to  the 
intuitive  idea  (Turing  [1],  see  also  Post  [1]).  It  was  stated  above  that  “a  function 
is  effectively  calculable  if  its  values  can  be  found  by  some  purely  mechanical 
process”.  We  may  take  this  statement  literally,  understanding  by  a  purely  mech¬ 
anical  process  one  which  could  be  carried  out  by  a  machine.  It  is  possible  to 
give  a  mathematical  description,  in  a  certain  normal  form,  of  the  structures 
of  these  machines.  The  development  of  these  ideas  leads  to  the  author’s  defini¬ 
tion  of  a  computable  function,  and  to  an  identification  of  computability 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  151 


with  effective  calculability.4  It  is  not  difficult,  though  somewhat  laborious,  to 
prove  that  these  three  definitions  are  equivalent  (Kleene  [3],  Turing  [2]). 

In  the  present  paper  we  shall  make  considerable  use  of  Church’s  identification 
of  effective  calculability  with  \-definability,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  of 
the  identification  with  computability  and  one  of  the  equivalence  theorems.  In 
most  cases  where  we  have  to  deal  with  an  effectively  calculable  function,  we  shall 
introduce  the  corresponding  W.F.F.  with  some  such  phrase  as  “the  function  f  is 
effectively  calculable,  let  F  be  a  formula  X  defining  it”,  or  “let  F  be  a  formula  such 
that  F(n)  is  convertible  to  . . .  whenever  n  represents  a  positive  integer”.  In  such 
cases  there  is  no  difficulty  in  seeing  how  a  machine  could  in  principle  be 
designed  to  calculate  the  values  of  the  function  concerned;  and,  assuming  this 
done,  the  equivalence  theorem  can  be  applied.  A  statement  of  what  the  formula  F 
actually  is  may  be  omitted.  We  may  immediately  introduce  on  this  basis  a  W.F.F. 
w  with  the  property  that 

vu(m,  n)  conv  r, 

if  r  is  the  greatest  positive  integer,  if  any,  for  which  mr  divides  n  and  r  is  1  if  there 
is  none.  We  also  introduce  Dt  with  the  properties 

Dt(n, n)  conv  3, 

Dt(n  +  m,  n)  conv  2, 

Dt(n,  n  +  m)  conv  1. 

There  is  another  point  to  be  made  clear  in  connection  with  the  point  of  view 
that  we  are  adopting.  It  is  intended  that  all  proofs  that  are  given  should  be 
regarded  no  more  critically  than  proofs  in  classical  analysis.  The  subject  matter, 
roughly  speaking,  is  constructive  systems  of  logic,  but  since  the  purpose  is 
directed  towards  choosing  a  particular  constructive  system  of  logic  for  practical 
use,  an  attempt  at  this  stage  to  put  our  theorems  into  constructive  form  would  be 
putting  the  cart  before  the  horse. 

Those  computable  functions  which  take  only  the  values  0  and  1  are  of 
particular  importance,  since  they  determine  and  are  determined  by  computable 
properties,  as  may  be  seen  by  replacing  “0”  and  “1”  by  “true”  and  “false”.  But, 
besides  this  type  of  property,  we  may  have  to  consider  a  different  type,  which  is, 
roughly  speaking,  less  constructive  than  the  computable  properties,  but  more  so 
than  the  general  predicates  of  classical  mathematics.  Suppose  that  we  have  a 
computable  function  of  the  natural  numbers  taking  natural  numbers  as  values, 
then  corresponding  to  this  function  there  is  the  property  of  being  a  value  of  the 
function.  Such  a  property  we  shall  describe  as  “axiomatic”;  the  reason  for  using 

4  We  shall  use  the  expression  “computable  function”  to  mean  a  function  calculable  by  a  machine,  and  we 
let  “effectively  calculable”  refer  to  the  intuitive  idea  without  particular  identification  with  any  one  of  these 
definitions.  We  do  not  restrict  the  values  taken  by  a  computable  function  to  be  natural  numbers;  we  may  for 
instance  have  computable  propositional  functions. 


152  I  Alan  Turing 


this  term  is  that  it  is  possible  to  define  such  a  property  by  giving  a  set  of  axioms, 
the  property  to  hold  for  a  given  argument  if  and  only  if  it  is  possible  to  deduce 
that  it  holds  from  the  axioms. 

Axiomatic  properties  may  also  be  characterized  in  this  way.  A  property  i//  of 
positive  integers  is  axiomatic  if  and  only  if  there  is  a  computable  property  rj)  of 
two  positive  integers,  such  that  i //(x)  is  true  if  and  only  if  there  is  a  positive 
integer  y  such  that  (f>(x,y)  is  true.  Or  again  i//  is  axiomatic  if  and  only  if  there  is  a 
W.F.F.  F  such  that  t jj(n)  is  true  if  and  only  if  F(n)  conv  2. 


3.  Number-theoretic  theorems 

By  a  number-theoretic  theorem 5  we  shall  mean  a  theorem  of  the  form  “d(x) 
vanishes  for  infinitely  many  natural  numbers  x”,  where  6(x)  is  a  primitive 
recursive  function.6 

We  shall  say  that  a  problem  is  number-theoretic  if  it  has  been  shown  that  any 
solution  of  the  problem  may  be  put  in  the  form  of  a  proof  of  one  or  more 
number-theoretic  theorems.  More  accurately  we  may  say  that  a  class  of  problems 
is  number-theoretic  if  the  solution  of  any  one  of  them  can  be  transformed  (by  a 
uniform  process)  into  the  form  of  proofs  of  number-theoretic  theorems. 

I  shall  now  draw  a  few  consequences  from  the  definition  of  “number  theoretic 
theorems”,  and  in  section  5  I  shall  try  to  justify  confining  our  consideration  to 
this  type  of  problem. 

An  alternative  form  for  number-theoretic  theorems  is  “for  each  natural 
number  x  there  exists  a  natural  number  y  such  that  cf>{x,y )  vanishes”,  where 
4>(x,y)  is  primitive  recursive.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  rule  whereby,  given  the 


5  I  believe  that  there  is  no  generally  accepted  meaning  for  this  term,  but  it  should  be  noticed  that  we  are 
using  it  in  a  rather  restricted  sense.  The  most  generally  accepted  meaning  is  probably  this:  suppose  that  we 
take  an  arbitrary  formula  of  the  functional  calculus  of  the  first  order  and  replace  the  function  variables  by 
primitive  recursive  relations.  The  resulting  formula  represents  a  typical  number-theoretic  theorem  in  this 
(more  general)  sense. 

6  Primitive  recursive  functions  of  natural  numbers  are  defined  inductively  as  follows.  Suppose  that 
f(x i,  . . . ,  xn_i),g(xi,  . . . ,  xn ),  h(x i,  . . .  ,xn+\ )  are  primitive  recursive,  then  (f>(x i,  . . . ,  Xn)  is  primitive 
recursive  if  it  is  defined  by  one  of  the  sets  of  equations  (a)  to  ( e ). 

(a)  </>(x 1,  x„)  =  h(x  1,  ...,  g(x  1,...,  x„),  Xm+1,  ...,  x„—ij  x„)  (1  m  n); 

(b)  x„)  =  f(x2,  . . . ,  x„); 

( c)  (j){x i)  =  a,  where  n  —  1  and  a  is  some  particular  natural  number; 

(d)  ^(jq)  =  Xi  +  1  (n  =  1); 

(e)  ^(Xi,  x„_i,  0)  =  f(x  i,  . . . ,  x„_i); 

<K*t,  •  ■  •  ,  Xn-l,  X„  +  1)  =  h(x  1,  .  .  .  ,  Xn,  tj>(x,,  X,,)) . 

The  class  of  primitive  recursive  functions  is  more  restricted  than  the  class  of  computable  functions,  but  it 
has  the  advantage  that  there  is  a  process  whereby  it  can  be  said  of  a  set  of  equations  whether  it  defines  a 
primitive  recursive  function  in  the  manner  described  above. 

If  (f>(x i,  ...,  xn )  is  primitive  recursive,  then  (f>(x i,  ...,  xn )  =  0  is  described  as  a  primitive  recursive 
relation  between  x\,  . . . ,  xn. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  153 


function  6(x),  we  can  find  a  function  (j)(x,  y),  or  given  <f>(x,y),  we  can  find  a 
function  9{x),  such  that  “8{x)  vanishes  infinitely  often”  is  a  necessary  and 
sufficient  condition  for  “for  each  x  there  is  a  y  such  that  <j)(x,y)  =  0”.  In  fact, 
given  8(x),  we  define 

4>(x,y)  =  6(x)  +  a  (x,y), 

where  a (x,y)  is  the  (primitive  recursive)  function  with  the  properties 

a(x,y)  =  1  (y  =£  x), 

=  0  (y  >  x). 

If  on  the  other  hand  we  are  given  4>{x,y)  we  define  8(x)  by  the  equations 

0i(O)  =  3, 

=  2d+T;l2(edX)))O'(‘f’(T;r3(0l(x))  -1,TO2(01  (*))))  2^3(01  (*))+l-<r(0(TO3(0i(*))-l,TO2(01  (*)))) 

8(x)  =  (j}(w3(di(x))  -  1,  m2(0i(x))), 

where  Tnr(x)  is  defined  so  as  to  mean  “the  largest  s  for  which  rs  divides  x”.  The 
function  er(x)  is  defined  by  the  equations  erf 0)  =  0,  a(x+  1)  =  1.  It  is  easily 
verified  that  the  functions  so  defined  have  the  desired  properties. 

We  shall  now  show  that  questions  about  the  truth  of  the  statements  of  the 
form  “does  f(x)  vanish  identically”,  where  fix)  is  a  computable  function,  can  be 
reduced  to  questions  about  the  truth  of  number-theoretic  theorems.  It  is  under¬ 
stood  that  in  each  case  the  rule  for  the  calculation  of  f{x)  is  given  and  that  we  are 
satisfied  that  this  rule  is  valid,  i.e.  that  the  machine  which  should  calculate /(x)  is 
circle  free  ([p.  60]).  The  function /(x),  being  computable,  is  general  recursive  in 
the  Herbrand-Godel  sense,  and  therefore,  by  a  general  theorem  due  to  Kleene7,  is 
expressible  in  the  form 

iKe/[</>(x,y)  =  0]),  (3.2) 

where  sy[§l(y)]  means  “the  least  y  for  which  2f(y)  is  true”  and  i p(y)  and  <f>[x,y ) 
are  primitive  recursive  functions.  Without  loss  of  generality,  we  may  suppose 
that  the  functions  take  only  the  values  0,  1.  Then,  if  we  define  p{x)  by  the 
equations  (3.1)  and 

p(o)  =  <A(0)  ( 1  —  0(0)), 

p(x+  1)  =  1  -  (1  -  p{x))  <t[1  +  8(x)  -  ^{tsj2(0i(x))}] 

it  will  be  seen  that  fix)  vanishes  identically  if  and  only  if  p{x)  vanishes  for 
infinitely  many  values  of  x. 

7  Kleene  [3],  121 .  This  result  is  really  superfluous  for  our  purpose,  since  the  proof  that  every  computable 
function  is  general  recursive  proceeds  by  showing  that  these  functions  are  of  the  form  (3.2).  (Turing  [2], 
161). 


154  I  Alan  Turing 


The  converse  of  this  result  is  not  quite  true.  We  cannot  say  that  the  question 
about  the  truth  of  any  number-theoretic  theorem  is  reducible  to  a  question 
about  whether  a  corresponding  computable  function  vanishes  identically;  we 
should  have  rather  to  say  that  it  is  reducible  to  the  problem  of  whether  a  certain 
machine  is  circle  free  and  calculates  an  identically  vanishing  function.  But  more 
is  true:  every  number-theoretic  theorem  is  equivalent  to  the  statement  that  a 
corresponding  machine  is  circle  free.  The  behaviour  of  the  machine  may  be 
described  roughly  as  follows:  the  machine  is  one  for  the  calculation  of  the 
primitive  recursive  function  6(x)  of  the  number-theoretic  problem,  except  that 
the  results  of  the  calculation  are  first  arranged  in  a  form  in  which  the  figures  0 
and  1  do  not  occur,  and  the  machine  is  then  modified  so  that,  whenever  it  has 
been  found  that  the  function  vanishes  for  some  value  of  the  argument,  then  0  is 
printed.  The  machine  is  circle  free  if  and  only  if  an  infinity  of  these  figures  are 
printed,  i.e.  if  and  only  if  0(x)  vanishes  for  infinitely  many  values  of  the 
argument.  That,  on  the  other  hand,  questions  of  circle  freedom  may  be  reduced 
to  questions  of  the  truth  of  number-theoretic  theorems  follows  from  the  fact  that 
0(x)  is  primitive  recursive  when  it  is  defined  to  have  the  value  0  if  a  certain 
machine  1%  prints  0  or  1  in  its  (x  +  1 ) -th  complete  configuration,  and  to  have 
the  value  1  otherwise. 

The  conversion  calculus  provides  another  normal  form  for  the  number-the¬ 
oretic  theorems,  and  the  one  which  we  shall  find  the  most  convenient  to  use. 
Every  number- theoretic  theorem  is  equivalent  to  a  statement  of  the  form  “A(n)  is 
convertible  to  2  for  every  W.F.F.  n  representing  a  positive  integer”,  A  being  a 
W.F.F.  determined  by  the  theorem;  the  property  of  A  here  asserted  will  be 
described  briefly  as  “A  is  dual”.  Conversely  such  statements  are  reducible  to 
number-theoretic  theorems.  The  first  half  of  this  assertion  follows  from  our 
results  for  computable  functions,  or  directly  in  this  way.  Since  6(x  —  1)  +  2  is 
primitive  recursive,  it  is  formally  definable,  say,  by  means  of  a  formula  G.  Now 
there  is  (Kleene  [1],  232)  a  W.F.F.  ‘TP  with  the  property  that,  if  T(r)  is  convertible 
to  a  formula  representing  a  positive  integer  for  each  positive  integer  r,  then 
^(T,  n)  is  convertible  to  s,  where  s  is  the  n-th  positive  integer  t  (if  there  is  one) 
for  which  T(t)  conv  2;  if  T(t)  conv  2  for  less  than  n  values  of  f  then  S®(T,  n)  has 
no  normal  form.  The  formula  G(S^(G,  n))  is  therefore  convertible  to  2  if  and 
only  if  0(x)  vanishes  for  at  least  n  values  of  x,  and  is  convertible  to  2  for  every 
positive  integer  xif  and  only  if  0(x)  vanishes  infinitely  often.  To  prove  the  second 
half  of  the  assertion,  we  take  Godel  representations  for  the  formulae  of  the 
conversion  calculus.  Let  c(x)  be  0  if  x  is  the  G.R.  of  2  (i.e.  if  x  is  23.  310.  5 . 73. 
II28.  13.17.  1910.  232.  29.31. 3710.  412.  43 . 4728 . 532.  592.  612.  672)  and  let  c(x) 
be  1  otherwise.  Take  an  enumeration  of  the  G.R.  of  the  formulae  into  which 
A(m)  is  convertible:  let  a(m,  n)  be  the  n-th  number  in  the  enumeration.  We  can 
arrange  the  enumeration  so  that  a(m,  n)  is  primitive  recursive.  Now  the  state¬ 
ment  that  A(m)  is  convertible  to  2  for  every  positive  integer  m  is  equivalent  to 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  155 


the  statement  that,  corresponding  to  each  positive  integer  m,  there  is  a  positive 
integer  n  such  that  c(a(m,  «))  =  0;  and  this  is  number-theoretic. 

It  is  easy  to  show  that  a  number  of  unsolved  problems,  such  as  the  problem 
of  the  truth  of  Fermat’s  last  theorem,  are  number-theoretic.  There  are,  how¬ 
ever,  also  problems  of  analysis  which  are  number-theoretic.  The  Riemann 
hypothesis  gives  us  an  example  of  this.  We  denote  by  £(s)  the  function  defined 

OO 

for  Sis  =  a  >  1  by  the  series  n~s  and  over  the  rest  of  the  complex  plane  with 

n=  1 

the  exception  of  the  point  s  =  1  by  analytic  continuation.  The  Riemann  hypoth¬ 
esis  asserts  that  this  function  does  not  vanish  in  the  domain  a  >  |.  It  is  easily 
shown  that  this  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  it  does  not  vanish  for 
2><T>',^s=t>2,  i.e.  that  it  does  not  vanish  inside  any  rectangle 
2X7>i+l/T,  T  >  t  >  2,  where  T  is  an  integer  greater  than  2.  Now  the 
function  satisfies  the  inequalities 


N 


<  2t(N  —  2)  h  2<o<\,  t  5=  2, 

|C(s)-C(/)|  <60t|s-s'|,  2  <  o'  <  j,  t'  S*  2, 

and  we  can  define  a  primitive  recursive  function  c(7,  l',  m,  n /,  N,  M)  such  that 


£(/,  m,  m',  N,  M)  —  M 


E 

i 


Nr~s 
s-  1 


<  2, 


and  therefore,  if  we  put 

£(/,  M,  m,  M,  M2  +  2,  M)  =  X(l,  m,  M), 

we  have 

Jl  +  i 9  m+S\  X(l,  m,  M)  —  122T 

a - m - • 

provided  that 

.  1  1—1  1+1  1  m  —  1  m+  1 

1  +  -  ^  - < - <2 - ,  2  < - < - <T 

2  T  M  M  M  MM 

(  -1  <  ,9  <  1,  -1  <  S'  <  1). 
If  we  define  B(M,  T)  to  be  the  smallest  value  of  X(l,  m,  M)  for  which 





1  1 

T  +  M 


l  1  1  m  1 

—  <2 - ,  2-1 - <  —  <T - , 

M  M  MM  M 


then  the  Riemann  hypothesis  is  true  if  for  each  T  there  is  an  M  satisfying 


B(M,  T)  >  122  T. 


156  I  Alan  Turing 

If  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a  I  such  that,  for  all  M,  B(M,  T )  =£  122 T,  the 
Riemann  hypothesis  is  false;  for  let  Im,  uim  be  such  that 

X{Im,  i»m,  M)  '■£  122T, 


then 


lM  +  imM 
M 


244  T 
M 


Now  if  a  is  a  condensation  point  of  the  sequence  (1m  +  iniM)/M  then  since  £(s) 
is  continuous  except  at  s  =  1  we  must  have  £(a)  =  0  implying  the  falsity  of  the 
Riemann  hypothesis.  Thus  we  have  reduced  the  problem  to  the  question  whether 
for  each  T  there  is  an  M  for  which 


B(M,  T)  >  122  T. 

B(M,  T)  is  primitive  recursive,  and  the  problem  is  therefore  number-theoretic. 


4.  A  type  of  problem  which  is  not  number-theoretic8 

Let  us  suppose  that  we  are  supplied  with  some  unspecified  means  of  solving 
number-theoretic  problems;  a  kind  of  oracle  as  it  were.  We  shall  not  go  any 
further  into  the  nature  of  this  oracle  apart  from  saying  that  it  cannot  be  a 
machine.  With  the  help  of  the  oracle  we  could  form  a  new  kind  of  machine 
(call  them  o-machines),  having  as  one  of  its  fundamental  processes  that  of 
solving  a  given  number-theoretic  problem.  More  definitely  these  machines  are 
to  behave  in  this  way.  The  moves  of  the  machine  are  determined  as  usual  by  a 
table  except  in  the  case  of  moves  from  a  certain  internal  configuration  0.  If  the 
machine  is  in  the  internal  configuration  0  and  if  the  sequence  of  symbols  marked 
with  /  is  then  the  well-formed9  formula  A,  then  the  machine  goes  into  the 
internal  configuration  p  or  t  according  as  it  is  or  is  not  true  that  A  is  dual. 
The  decision  as  to  which  is  the  case  is  referred  to  the  oracle. 

These  machines  may  be  described  by  tables  of  the  same  kind  as  those  used  for 
the  description  of  rt-machines,  there  being  no  entries,  however,  for  the  internal 
configuration  0.  We  obtain  description  numbers  from  these  tables  in  the  same 
way  as  before.  If  we  make  the  convention  that,  in  assigning  numbers  to  internal 
configurations,  0,  p,  t  are  always  to  be  q2>  qi,  <74,  then  the  description  numbers 
determine  the  behaviour  of  the  machines  uniquely. 

Given  any  one  of  these  machines  we  may  ask  ourselves  the  question  whether  or 
not  it  prints  an  infinity  of  figures  0  or  1;  I  assert  that  this  class  of  problem  is  not 
number-theoretic.  In  view  of  the  definition  of  “number-theoretic  problem”  this 
means  that  it  is  not  possible  to  construct  an  o-machine  which,  when  supplied 


8  Compare  Rosser  [  1  ] . 

9  Without  real  loss  of  generality  we  may  suppose  that  A  is  always  well  formed. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  157 


with  the  description  of  any  other  o-machine,  will  determine  whether  that 
machine  is  o-circle  free.10  The  argument  may  be  taken  over  directly  from  Turing 
[  1  ] ,  §  8.  We  say  that  a  number  is  o-satisfactory  if  it  is  the  description  number  of 
an  o-circle  free  machine.  Then,  if  there  is  an  o-machine  which  will  determine  of 
any  integer  whether  it  is  o-satisfactory,  there  is  also  an  o-machine  to  calculate  the 
values  of  the  function  1  —  <f>n(n).  Let  r(n)  be  the  «-th  o-satisfactory  number  and 
let  <pn(m )  be  the  m-th  figure  printed  by  the  o-machine  whose  description 
number  is  r  (n).  This  o-machine  is  circle  free  and  there  is  therefore  an  o-satisfac¬ 
tory  number  K  such  that  4>K(n)  =  1  —  (/>„(«)  for  all  n.  Putting  n  =  K  yields  a 
contradiction.  This  completes  the  proof  that  problems  of  circle  freedom  of 
o-machines  are  not  number-theoretic. 

Propositions  of  the  form  that  an  o-machine  is  o-circle  free  can  always  be  put  in 
the  form  of  propositions  obtained  from  formulae  of  the  functional  calculus  of 
the  first  order  by  replacing  some  of  the  functional  variables  by  primitive  recursive 
relations.  Compare  foot-note  [5]  on  page  [152]. 


5.  Syntactical  theorems  as  number-theoretic  theorems 

I  now  mention  a  property  of  number-theoretic  theorems  which  suggests  that 
there  is  reason  for  regarding  them  as  of  particular  importance. 

Suppose  that  we  have  some  axiomatic  system  of  a  purely  formal  nature.  We  do 
not  concern  ourselves  at  all  in  interpretations  for  the  formulae  of  this  system; 
they  are  to  be  regarded  as  of  interest  for  themselves.  An  example  of  what  is  in 
mind  is  afforded  by  the  conversion  calculus  (§1).  Every  sequence  of  symbols  “A 
conv  B”,  where  A  and  B  are  well  formed  formulae,  is  a  formula  of  the  axiomatic 
system  and  is  provable  if  the  W.F.F.  A  is  convertible  to  B.  The  rules  of  conversion 
give  us  the  rules  of  procedure  in  this  axiomatic  system. 

Now  consider  a  new  rule  of  procedure  which  is  reputed  to  yield  only  formulae 
provable  in  the  original  sense.  We  may  ask  ourselves  whether  such  a  rule  is  valid. 
The  statement  that  such  a  rule  is  valid  would  be  number-theoretic.  To  prove  this, 
let  us  take  Godel  representations  for  the  formulae,  and  an  enumeration  of  the 
provable  formulae;  let  (/>(r)  be  the  G.R.  of  the  r-th  formula  in  the  enumeration. 
We  may  suppose  cf>(r )  to  be  primitive  recursive  if  we  are  prepared  to  allow 
repetitions  in  the  enumeration.  Let  >p(r)be  the  G.R.  of  the  r-th  formula  obtained 
by  the  new  rule,  then  the  statement  that  this  new  rule  is  valid  is  equivalent  to  the 
assertion  of 


(r)Ps)Wr(r)  =  0(s)] 

(the  domain  of  individuals  being  the  natural  numbers).  It  has  been  shown  in  §3 
that  such  statements  are  number-theoretic. 


10  Compare  Turing  [1],  §6,  7. 


158  I  Alan  Turing 


It  might  plausibly  be  argued  that  all  those  theorems  of  mathematics  which 
have  any  significance  when  taken  alone  are  in  effect  syntactical  theorems  of  this 
kind,  stating  the  validity  of  certain  “derived  rules”  of  procedure.  Without  going 
so  far  as  this,  I  should  assert  that  theorems  of  this  kind  have  an  importance 
which  makes  it  worth  while  to  give  them  special  consideration. 


6.  Logic  formulae 

We  shall  call  a  formula  L  a  logic  formula  (or,  if  it  is  clear  that  we  are  speaking  of  a 
W.F.F.,  simply  a  logic)  if  it  has  the  property  that,  if  A  is  a  formula  such  that  L(A) 
conv  2,  then  A  is  dual. 

A  logic  formula  gives  us  a  means  of  satisfying  ourselves  of  the  truth  of 
number-theoretic  theorems.  For  to  each  number-theoretic  proposition  there 
corresponds  a  W.F.F.  A  which  is  dual  if  and  only  if  the  proposition  is  true. 
Now,  if  L  is  a  logic  and  L(A)  conv  2,  then  A  is  dual  and  we  know  that  the 
corresponding  number- theoretic  proposition  is  true.  It  does  not  follow  that,  if  L 
is  a  logic,  we  can  use  L  to  satisfy  ourselves  of  the  truth  of  any  number-theoretic 
theorem. 

If  L  is  a  logic,  the  set  of  formulae  A  for  which  L(A)  conv  2  will  be  called  the 
extent  of  L. 

It  maybe  proved  by  the  use  of  (D),  (E),  p.  [150],  that  there  is  a  formula  Xsuch 
that,  if  M  has  a  normal  form,  has  no  free  variables  and  is  not  convertible  to  2, 
then  X(M)  conv  1,  but,  if  M  conv  2,  then  X(M)  conv  2.  If  L  is  a  logic,  then 
Xx .  X(L(x))  is  also  a  logic  whose  extent  is  the  same  as  that  of  L,  and  which  has 
the  property  that,  if  A  has  no  free  variables,  then 

(\*.X(L(*))}(A) 

either  is  always  convertible  to  1  or  to  2  or  else  has  no  normal  form.  A  logic  with 
this  property  will  be  said  to  be  standardized. 

We  shall  say  that  a  logic  L'  is  at  least  as  complete  as  a  logic  L  if  the  extent  of  L  is 
a  subset  of  the  extent  of  L'.  The  logic  L'  is  more  complete  than  L  if  the  extent  of  L 
is  a  proper  subset  of  the  extent  of  L'. 

Suppose  that  we  have  an  effective  set  of  rules  by  which  we  can  prove  formulae 
to  be  dual;  i.e.  we  have  a  system  of  symbolic  logic  in  which  the  propositions 
proved  are  of  the  form  that  certain  formulae  are  dual.  Then  we  can  find  a  logic 
formula  whose  extent  consists  of  just  those  formulae  which  can  be  proved  to  be 
dual  by  the  rules;  that  is  to  say,  there  is  a  rule  for  obtaining  the  logic  formula 
from  the  system  of  symbolic  logic.  In  fact  the  system  of  symbolic  logic  enables  us 
to  obtain  a  computable  function  of  positive  integers  whose  values  run  through 
the  Godel  representations  of  the  formulae  provable  by  means  of  the  given  rules.11 


1  Compare  Turing  [1],  [p.  77,  n.  7],  [2],  156. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  159 


By  the  theorem  of  equivalence  of  computable  and  \-defmable  functions,  there  is 
a  formula  J  such  that  J(l),  J(2),  . . .  are  the  G.R.  of  these  formulae.  Now  let 

W  — >  kjv .  .  8 (_/(«),  v),  1,  I,  2). 

Then  I  assert  that  W{  J)  is  a  logic  with  the  required  properties.  The  properties  of 
9  imply  that  (?>(C,  1)  is  convertible  to  the  least  positive  integer  n  for  which  C(n) 
conv  2,  and  has  no  normal  form  if  there  is  no  such  integer.  Consequently 
S^(C,  1,  7,  2)  is  convertible  to  2  if  C(n)  conv  2  for  some  positive  integer  n,  and 
it  has  no  normal  form  otherwise.  That  is  to  say  that  W{  J,  A)  conv  2  if  and  only  if 
8(J(n),  A)  conv  2,  some  n,  i.e.  if  J(n)  conv  A  some  n. 

There  is  conversely  a  formula  W'  such  that,  if  L  is  a  logic,  then  W'( L) 
enumerates  the  extent  of  L.  For  there  is  a  formula  Q  such  that  Q(L,  A,  n)  conv 
2  if  and  only  if  L(A)  is  convertible  to  2  in  less  than  n  steps.  We  then  put 

W'  — >  AJn.  form  ( uj(1 ,  9{\x .  Q(l,  form  (uj{  2,  x)),  w{  3,  x)),  «))). 

Of  course,  W'(W(J))  normally  entirely  different  from  J  and  W(W'{  L))  from  L. 

In  the  case  where  we  have  a  symbolic  logic  whose  propositions  can  be  inter¬ 
preted  as  number-theoretic  theorems,  but  are  not  expressed  in  the  form  of  the 
duality  of  formulae,  we  shall  again  have  a  corresponding  logic  formula,  but  its 
relation  to  the  symbolic  logic  is  not  so  simple.  As  an  example  let  us  take  the  case 
where  the  symbolic  logic  proves  that  certain  primitive  recursive  functions  vanish 
infinitely  often.  As  was  shown  in  §3,  we  can  associate  with  each  such  proposition  a 
W.F.F.  which  is  dual  if  and  only  if  the  proposition  is  true.  When  we  replace  the 
propositions  of  the  symbolic  logic  by  theorems  on  the  duality  of  formulae  in  this 
way,  our  previous  argument  applies  and  we  obtain  a  certain  logic  formula  L. 
However,  L  does  not  determine  uniquely  which  are  the  propositions  provable  in 
the  symbolic  logic;  for  it  is  possible  that  “0i(x)  vanishes  infinitely  often”  and 
“02  (x)  vanishes  infinitely  often”  are  both  associated  with  “A  is  dual”,  and  that  the 
first  of  these  propositions  is  provable  in  the  system,  but  the  second  not.  However,  if 
we  suppose  that  the  system  of  symbolic  logic  is  sufficiently  powerful  to  be  able  to 
carry  out  the  argument  on  pp.  [154-5]  then  this  difficulty  cannot  arise.  There  is 
also  the  possibility  that  there  may  be  formulae  in  the  extent  of  L  with  no  propos¬ 
itions  of  the  form  “6(x)  vanishes  infinitely  often”  corresponding  to  them.  But  to 
each  such  formula  we  can  assign  (by  a  different  argument)  a  proposition  p  of  the 
symbolic  logic  which  is  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for  A  to  be  dual.  With 
p  is  associated  (in  the  first  way)  a  formula  A' .  Now  L  can  always  be  modified  so  that 
its  extent  contains  A'  whenever  it  contains  A. 

We  shall  be  interested  principally  in  questions  of  completeness.  Let  us  suppose 
that  we  have  a  class  of  systems  of  symbolic  logic,  the  propositions  of  these 
systems  being  expressed  in  a  uniform  notation  and  interpretable  as  number- 
theoretic  theorems;  suppose  also  that  there  is  a  rule  by  which  we  can  assign  to 
each  proposition  p  of  the  notation  a  W.F.F.  Ap  which  is  dual  if  and  only  if  p  is 


160  I  Alan  Turing 

true,  and  that  to  each  W.F.F.  A  we  can  assign  a  proposition  pA  which  is  a 
necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for  A  to  be  dual.  pAp  is  to  be  expected  to 
differ  from  p.  To  each  symbolic  logic  C  we  can  assign  two  logic  formulae  Lc  and 
Lc'.  A  formula  A  belongs  to  the  extent  of  Lc  if  Pa  is  provable  in  C,  while  the 
extent  of  Lc/  consists  of  all  Ap,  where  p  is  provable  in  C.  Let  us  say  that  the  class 
of  symbolic  logics  is  complete  if  each  true  proposition  is  provable  in  one  of  them: 
let  us  also  say  that  a  class  of  logic  formulae  is  complete  if  the  set-theoretic  sum  of 
the  extents  of  these  logics  includes  all  dual  formulae.  I  assert  that  a  necessary 
condition  for  a  class  of  symbolic  logics  C  to  be  complete  is  that  the  class  of  logics 
L c  is  complete,  while  a  sufficient  condition  is  that  the  class  of  logics  L </  is 
complete.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  class  of  symbolic  logics  is  complete;  consider 
pA,  where  A  is  arbitrary  but  dual.  It  must  be  provable  in  one  of  the  systems,  C  say. 
A  therefore  belongs  to  the  extent  of  Lc,  i.e.  the  class  of  logics  Lc  is  complete. 
Now  suppose  the  class  of  logics  L</  to  be  complete.  Let  p  be  an  arbitrary  true 
proposition  of  the  notation;  Af  must  belong  to  the  extent  of  some  L </  ,  and  this 
means  that  p  is  provable  in  C. 

We  shall  say  that  a  single  logic  formula  L  is  complete  if  its  extent  includes  all 
dual  formulae;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  complete  if  it  enables  us  to  prove  every  true 
number-theoretic  theorem.  It  is  a  consequence  of  the  theorem  of  Godel  (if 
suitably  extended)  that  no  logic  formula  is  complete,  and  this  also  follows 
from  (C),  p.  [  150] ,  or  from  the  results  of  Turing  [  1  ] ,  §8,  when  taken  in  conjunction 
with  §3  of  the  present  paper.  The  idea  of  completeness  of  a  logic  formula  is  not 
therefore  very  important,  although  it  is  useful  to  have  a  term  for  it. 

Suppose  Y  to  be  a  W.F.F.  such  that  Y(n)  is  a  logic  for  each  positive  integer  n. 
The  formulae  of  the  extent  of  Y(n)  are  enumerated  by  W(Y(n)),  and  the 
combined  extents  of  these  logics  by 

Xr .  W(Y(zzj(2,  r),  w(3,  r))). 

If  we  put 

r  — >  Xy.  W'(Xr .  W(y(zu{2,  r),  w{3,  r)))), 
then  T(Y)  is  a  logic  whose  extent  is  the  combined  extent  of 

Y(l),  Y(2),  Y(3),  ... 

To  each  W.F.F.  L  we  can  assign  a  W.F.F.  V(L)  such  that  a  necessary  and  sufficient 
condition  for  L  to  be  a  logic  formula  is  that  V(L)  is  dual.  Let  Nm  be  a  W.F.F. 
which  enumerates  all  formulae  with  normal  forms  and  no  free  variables.  Then 
the  condition  for  L  to  be  a  logic  is  that  L(Nm(r),  s)  conv  2  for  all  positive 
integers  r,  s,  i.e.  that 


Xa .  L(Nm(ti7(2,  a)),  w{3 ,a)) 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  161 


is  dual.  We  may  therefore  put 

V  — >  Xla  .  /(Nm(tu(2,  a)),  vj{3,  a)). 


7.  Ordinals 

We  begin  our  treatment  of  ordinals  with  some  brief  definitions  from  the  Cantor 
theory  of  ordinals,  but  for  the  understanding  of  some  of  the  proofs  a  greater 
amount  of  the  Cantor  theory  is  necessary  than  is  set  out  here. 

Suppose  that  we  have  a  class  determined  by  the  propositional  function  D(x) 
and  a  relation  G(x,  y)  ordering  its  members,  i.e.  satisfying 

G(x,  y)  &  G(y,  z)  D  G(x,  z),  (i)  \ 

D{x)  &  D{y)  D  G(x,  y)  v  G(y,  x)  v  x  =  y,  (ii)  I 
G(x,  y)  D  D(x)  8cD(y),  (iii)  | 

~  G(x,  x).  (iv)  J 

The  class  defined  by  D(x)  is  then  called  a  series  with  the  ordering  relation  G(x,  y). 
The  series  is  said  to  be  well  ordered  and  the  ordering  relation  is  called  an  ordinal  if 
every  sub-series  which  is  not  void  has  a  first  term,  i.e.  if 

(D'){(3x)(D'(x))  & (x)(D'(x)  D  D(x)) 

D  (3z)(y)[Dl(z)  & (D'(y)  D  G(z,  y)  v  z  =  y)]}. 

The  condition  (7.2)  is  equivalent  to  another,  more  suitable  for  our  purposes, 
namely  the  condition  that  every  descending  subsequence  must  terminate;  for¬ 
mally 

(x){D'(x)  D  D(x)lk(3y)(D'(y)lkG(y,  *))}  D  (x)(~  D'(x)).  (7.3) 

The  ordering  relation  G(x,  y)  is  said  to  be  similar  to  G'(x,  y)  if  there  is  a  one- 
one  correspondence  between  the  series  transforming  the  one  relation  into  the 
other.  This  is  best  expressed  formally,  thus 

(3M)[(x){D(x)  D  (3 x/)M(x,  x')}  &(x'){D'(x/)  D  (3 x)M(x,  x')} 

&{(M(x,  x')  &M(x,  x"))  v  (M(x',  x)  &M(x",  x))  D  x1  =  x"} 
&{M(x,  x')  &M(y,  /)  D  (G(x,  y)  =  G(x',  /))}].  (7.4) 

Ordering  relations  are  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  same  ordinal  if  and  only  if 
they  are  similar. 

We  wish  to  give  names  to  all  the  ordinals,  but  this  will  not  be  possible  until 
they  have  been  restricted  in  some  way;  the  class  of  ordinals,  as  at  present  defined, 
is  more  than  enumerable.  The  restrictions  that  we  actually  impose  are  these:  D(x) 
is  to  imply  that  x  is  a  positive  integer;  D(x )  and  G(x,  y)  are  to  be  computable 


162  I  Alan  Turing 


properties.  Both  of  the  propositional  functions  D(x),  G(x,  y)  can  then  be 
described  by  means  of  a  single  W.F.F.  SI  with  the  properties: 

fl(m,  n)  conv  4  unless  both  D(m)  and  D(n)  are  true, 

fl(m,  m)  conv  3  if  D(m)  is  true, 

fl(m,  n)  conv  2  if  D(m),  D(n),  G{m,  n),  ~  (m  =  n)  are  true, 

fl(m,  n)  conv  1  if  D(m),  D(n),  ~  G(m,  n),  ~  (m  =  n)  are  true. 

In  consequence  of  the  conditions  to  which  D(x),  G(x,  y)  are  subjected,  SI  must 
further  satisfy: 

(a)  if  il(m,  n)  is  convertible  to  1  or  2,  then  fl(m,  m)  and  fi(n,  n)  are 
convertible  to  3, 

( b )  if  film,  m)  and  il(n,  n)  are  convertible  to  3,  then  Sl(  m,  n)  is  convertible 
to  1,  2,  or  3, 

(c)  if  ft(m,  n)  is  convertible  to  1,  then  fl(n,  m)  is  convertible  to  2  and 
conversely, 

( d )  if  il(m,  n)  and  il(n,  p)  are  convertible  to  1,  then  ft(m,  p)  is  also, 

(e)  there  is  no  sequence  m1;  tn2,  . . .  such  that  fl(m;+1,  m,)  conv  2  for  each 
positive  integer  i, 

(/)  il(m,  n)  is  always  convertible  to  1,  2,  3,  or  4. 

If  a  formula  SI  satisfies  these  conditions  then  there  are  corresponding  propos¬ 
itional  functions  D(x),  G(x,  y).  We  shall  therefore  say  that  SI  is  an  ordinal  formula  if 
it  satisfies  the  conditions  (a)-(f).  It  will  be  seen  that  a  consequence  of  this 
definition  is  that  Dt  is  an  ordinal  formula;  it  represents  the  ordinal  «.  The 
definition  that  we  have  given  does  not  pretend  to  have  virtues  such  as  elegance 
or  convenience.  It  has  been  introduced  rather  to  fix  our  ideas  and  to  show  how  it  is 
possible  in  principle  to  describe  ordinals  by  means  of  well-formed  formulae.  The 
definitions  could  be  modified  in  a  number  of  ways.  Some  such  modifications  are 
quite  trivial;  they  are  typified  by  modifications  such  as  changing  the  numbers  1,  2, 
3,  4,  used  in  the  definition,  to  others.  Two  such  definitions  will  be  said  to  be 
equivalent;  in  general,  we  shall  say  that  two  definitions  are  equivalent  if  there  are 
W.F.F.  T,  T'  such  that,  if  A  is  an  ordinal  formula  under  one  definition  and 
represents  the  ordinal  a,  then  T'(A)  is  an  ordinal  formula  under  the  second 
definition  and  represents  the  same  ordinal;  and,  conversely,  if  A'  is  an  ordinal 
formula  under  the  second  definition  representing  a,  then  T(A')  represents  a 
under  the  first  definition.  Besides  definitions  equivalent  in  this  sense  to  our 
original  definition,  there  are  a  number  of  other  possibilities  open.  Suppose  for 
instance  that  we  do  not  require  D(x)  and  G(x,  y)  to  be  computable,  but  that  we 
require  only  that  D(x)  and  G(x,  y)Scx  <  y  are  axiomatic.12  This  leads  to  a 


12  To  require  G(x,  y)  to  be  axiomatic  amounts  to  requiring  G(x ,  y)  to  be  computable  on  account  of  (7.1) 

(ii). 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  163 


definition  of  an  ordinal  formula  which  is  (presumably)  not  equivalent  to  the 
definition  that  we  are  using.13  There  are  numerous  possibilities,  and  little  to 
guide  us  in  choosing  one  definition  rather  than  another.  No  one  of  them 
could  well  be  described  as  “wrong”;  some  of  them  may  be  found  more 
valuable  in  applications  than  others,  and  the  particular  choice  that  we 
have  made  has  been  determined  partly  by  the  applications  that  we  have  in 
view.  In  the  case  of  theorems  of  a  negative  character,  one  would  wish  to 
prove  them  for  each  one  of  the  possible  definitions  of  “ordinal  formula”. 
This  programme  could,  I  think,  be  carried  through  for  the  negative  results  of 
§9,10. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  possible  ways  of  defining  ordinal  formulae,  I  must 
mention  another  definition  due  to  Church  and  Kleene  (Church  and  Kleene  [1]). 
We  can  make  use  of  this  definition  in  constructing  ordinal  logics,  but  it  is  more 
convenient  to  use  a  slightly  different  definition  which  is  equivalent  (in  the  sense 
just  described)  to  the  Church-Kleene  definition  as  modified  in  Church  [4] . 

Introduce  the  abbreviations 

U  — >  Xufx.  u(Xy.f(y(I,  x))), 

Sue  — >  Xaufx .  f(a(u,  f,  x)). 

We  define  first  a  partial  ordering  relation  “<”  which  holds  between  certain  pairs 
ofW.F.F.  [conditions  ( 1 )— (5) ] . 

(1)  If  A  conv  B,  then  A  <  C  implies  B  <  C  and  C  <  A  implies  C  <  B. 

(2)  A  <  Sue  (A). 

(3)  For  any  positive  integers  m  and  n,  Xufx.  R(n)  <  Xufx .  R(m)  implies 
Xufx.  R(n)  <  Xufx.  «(R). 

(4)  If  A  <  B  and  B  <  C,  then  A  <  C.  ( 1) — (4)  are  required  for  any  W.F.F. 
A,  B,  C,  Xufx .  R. 

(5)  The  relation  A  <  B  holds  only  when  compelled  to  do  so  by  (1) — (4). 

We  define  C-K  ordinal  formulae  by  the  conditions  (6) — (10). 

(6)  If  A  conv  B  and  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  then  B  is  a  C-K  ordinal 
formula. 

(7)  U  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula. 

(8)  If  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  then  Sue  (A)  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula. 

(9)  If  Xufx .  R(n)  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  and 

Xufx.  R(n)  <  Xufx  .  R(S(n)) 


13  On  the  other  hand,  if  D(x )  is  axiomatic  and  G(x,  y)  is  computable  in  the  modified  sense  that  there  is  a 
rule  for  determining  whether  G(x,  y)  is  true  which  leads  to  a  definite  result  in  all  cases  where  D(x)  and  D(y) 
are  true,  the  corresponding  definition  of  ordinal  formula  is  equivalent  to  our  definition.  To  give  the  proof 
would  be  too  much  of  a  digression.  Probably  other  equivalences  of  this  kind  hold. 


164  I  Alan  Turing 


for  each  positive  integer  n,  then  Xufx  .  !<(R)  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula.14 

(10)  A  formula  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  only  if  compelled  to  be  so  by 

(6)-(9). 

The  representation  of  ordinals  by  formulae  is  described  by  (11 )— ( 15). 

(11)  If  A  conv  B  and  A  represents  a,  then  B  represents  a. 

(12)  U  represents  1. 

(13)  If  A  represents  a,  then  Sue  (A)  represents  a  +  1. 

(14)  If  Xufx .  R(n)  represents  a„  for  each  positive  integer  n,  then  Xufx .  u( R) 
represents  the  upper  bound  of  the  sequence  04,  04,  04,  . . . 

(15)  A  formula  represents  an  ordinal  only  when  compelled  to  do  so  by 
(11 ) — ( 14). 

We  denote  any  ordinal  represented  by  A  by  Ha  without  prejudice  to  the 
possibility  that  more  than  one  ordinal  may  be  represented  by  A.  We  shall  write 
A  =£  B  to  mean  A  <  B  or  A  conv  B. 

In  proving  properties  of  C-K  ordinal  formulae  we  shall  often  use  a  kind  of 
analogue  of  the  principle  of  transfinite  induction.  If  (f>  is  some  property  and  we 
have: 

(a)  If  A  conv  B  and  f>( A),  then  rf>{ B), 

(b)  <KU), 

(c)  If  (/>( A),  then  cf)( Sue  (A)), 

( d )  If  (f>(Xufx .  R(n))  and  Xufx.  R(n)  <  Xufx .  R(S(n)) 
for  each  positive  integer  n,  then 

cj)(Xufx .  u{ R)); 

then  <p(A)  for  each  C-K  ordinal  formula  A.  To  prove  the  validity  of  this  principle 
we  have  only  to  observe  that  the  class  of  formulae  A  satisfying  <f>( A)  is  one  of 
those  of  which  the  class  of  C-K  ordinal  formulae  was  defined  to  be  the  smallest. 
We  can  use  this  principle  to  help  us  to  prove: 

(i)  Every  C-K  ordinal  formula  is  convertible  to  the  form  Xufx .  B,  where  B  is 
in  normal  form. 

(ii)  There  is  a  method  by  which  for  any  C-K  ordinal  formula,  we  can 
determine  into  which  of  the  forms  U,  Sue  ( Xufx  .  B),  Xufx  .  m(R)  (where 

14  If  we  also  allow  Xufx .  u( R)  to  be  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  when 
Xufx .  n(R)  conv  Xufx .  S(n,  R) 

for  all  n,  then  the  formulae  for  sum,  product  and  exponentiation  of  C-K  ordinal  formulae  can  be  much 
simplified.  For  instance,  if  A  and  B  represent  a  and  (3,  then 

Xufx .  B(w,  /,  A (m,  /,  x)) 
represents  a  +  (3.  Property  (6)  remains  true. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  165 


u  is  free  in  R)  it  is  convertible,  and  by  which  we  can  determine  B,  R.  In 
each  case  B,  R  are  unique  apart  from  conversions. 

(iii)  If  A  represents  any  ordinal,  Ha  is  unique.  If  Ha,  Hb  exist  and  A  <  B,  then 

“A  <  Eb- 

(iv)  If  A,  B,  C  are  C-K  ordinal  formulae  and  B  <  A,  C  <  A,  then  either 
B  <  C,  C  <  B,  or  B  conv  C. 

(v)  A  formula  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  if: 

(A)  U^A, 

(B)  If  Xufx .  m(R)  =£  A  and  n  is  a  positive  integer,  then 

Xufx .  R(n)  <  Xufx .  R(S(n)), 

(C)  For  any  two  W.F.F.  B,  C  with  B  <  A,  C  <  A  we  have  B  <  C,  C  <  B, 
or  B  conv  C,  but  never  B  <  B, 

(D)  There  is  no  infinite  sequence  Bi,  B2,  . . .  for  which 

Br  <  Br  !  <  A 

for  each  r. 

(vi)  There  is  a  formula  H  such  that,  if  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  then  H(  A) 
is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  the  same  ordinal.  H( A)  is  not  an 
ordinal  formula  unless  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula. 

Proof  of  (i).  Take  <f>(  A)  to  be  “A  is  convertible  to  the  form  Xufx .  B,  where  B  is 
in  normal  form”.  The  conditions  (a)  and  (b)  are  trivial.  For  (c),  suppose  that  A 
conv  Xufx  .  B,  where  B  is  in  normal  form;  then 

Sue  (A)  conv  Xufx.fi B) 

and/(B)  is  in  normal  form.  For  ( d )  we  have  only  to  show  that  m(R)  has  a  normal 
form,  i.e.  that  R  has  a  normal  form;  and  this  is  true  since  R(l)  has  a  normal  form. 

Proof  of  (ii).  Since,  by  hypothesis,  the  formula  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  we  have 
only  to  perform  conversions  on  it  until  it  is  in  one  of  the  forms  described.  It  is  not 
possible  to  convert  it  into  two  of  these  three  forms.  For  suppose  that 
Xufx  ./(A(m,  /,  x))  conv  Xufx.  «(R)  and  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula;  it  is  then 
convertible  to  the  form  Xufx .  B,  where  B  is  in  normal  form.  But  the  normal 
form  of  Xufx .  m(R)  can  be  obtained  by  conversions  on  R,  and  that  of 
Xufx  ./(A(m,  /,  x))  by  conversions  on  A («,  f,  x)  (as  follows  from  Church  and 
Rosser  [1],  Theorem  2);  this,  however,  would  imply  that  the  formula  in  question 
had  two  normal  forms,  one  of  form  Xufx .  u{  S)  and  one  of  form  Xufx .  /(C),  which 
is  impossible.  Or  let  U  conv  Xufx  .  u(R),  where  R  is  a  well  formed  formula  with  u 
as  a  free  variable.  We  may  suppose  R  to  be  in  normal  form.  Now  U  is 
Xufx  .u(Xy  -f(y(I,  x))).  By  (A),  p.  [149],  R  is  identical  with  Xy.f(y{I,  x)), 
which  does  not  have  u  as  a  free  variable.  It  now  remains  to  show  only  that  if 


166  I  Alan  Turing 


Sue  ( Xufx.B )  conv  Sue  (Xufx.  B')  and  Xufx.  u(R)  conv  Xufx.  w(R'), 

then  B  conv  B'  and  R  conv  R'. 

If  Sue  ( Xufx.B )  conv  Sue  (Xufx.B'), 

then  Xufx  ./(B)  conv  Xufx  .f(B'); 

but  both  of  these  formulae  can  be  brought  to  normal  form  by  conversions  on  B, 
B'  and  therefore  B  conv  B'.  The  same  argument  applies  in  the  case  in  which 
Xufx .  tt(R)  conv  Xufx .  u(R'). 

Proof  of  (in).  To  prove  the  first  half,  take  0(A)  to  be  “Ha  is  unique”.  Then  (7.5) 
(a)  is  trivial,  and  (b)  follows  from  the  fact  that  L/is  not  convertible  either  to  the  form 
Sue  (A)  or  to  Xufx .  u( R),  where  R  has  u  as  a  free  variable.  For  (c):  Sue  (A)  is  not 
convertible  to  the  form  Xufx.  u(R);  the  possibility  that  Sue  (A)  represents  an 
ordinal  on  account  of  (12)  or  (14)  is  therefore  eliminated.  By  (13),  Sue  (A) 
represents  a'  +  1  if  A'  represents  a'  and  Sue  (A)  conv  Sue  (A').  If  we  suppose  that 
A  represents  a,  then  A,  A',  being  C-K  ordinal  formulae,  are  convertible  to  the  forms 
Xufx  .  B,  Xufx  .  B';  but  then,  by  (ii),  B  conv  B',  i.e.  A  conv  A',  and  therefore  a  =  a' 
by  the  hypothesis  0(A).  Then  Hsuc  (A)  =  a' +  1  is  unique.  For  (d):Xufx .  u(R)isnot 
convertible  to  the  form  Sue  (A)  or  to  (7 if  R  has  u  as  a  free  variable.  If  Xufx .  «(R) 
represents  an  ordinal,  it  is  so  therefore  in  virtue  of  ( 14) ,  possibly  together  with  (11). 
Now,  if  Xufx .  u(R)  conv  Xufx .  u(R'),  then  R  conv  R',  so  that  the  sequence 
Xufx  .  R(  1),  Xufx  .  R(2),  ...  in  (14)  is  unique  apart  from  conversions.  Then,  by  the 
induction  hypothesis,  the  sequence  oti,  ct2>  «3>  ..  .is  unique.  The  only  ordinal  that 
is  represented  by  Xufx .  «(R)  is  the  upper  bound  of  this  sequence;  and  this  is  unique. 

For  the  second  half  we  use  a  type  of  argument  rather  different  from  our 
transfinite  induction  principle.  The  formulae  B  for  which  A  <  B  form  the 
smallest  class  for  which: 

Sue  (A)  belongs  to  the  class. 

If  C  belongs  to  the  class,  then  Sue  (C)  belongs  to  it. 

If  Xufx .  R(n)  belongs  to  the  class  and 

Xufx .  R(n)  <  Xufx .  R(m), 

where  m,  n  are  some  positive  integers,  then  Xufx.  u( R)  belongs  to  it. 

If  C  belongs  to  the  class  and  C  conv  C',  then  C'  belongs  to  it. 

It  will  be  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  class  of  formulae  B  for  which  either  HB 
does  not  exist  or  Ha  <  EB  satisfies  the  conditions  (7.6).  Now 

‘—‘Sue  (A)  =  “A  +  1  >  aA) 

Hsuc  (C)  >  Hc  >  HA  if  C  is  in  the  class. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  167 

If  Hx„/c.r(I1)  does  not  exist,  then  E\ufx.u(R)  does  not  exist,  and  therefore 
Xufx .  m(R)  is  in  the  class.  If  R(n)  exists  and  is  greater  than  Ha,  and 
Xufx  .  R(n)  <  Xufx  .  R(m),  then 

^Sufic .  u(R)  ^Xw^x.R(n)  ^A> 

so  that  Xufx .  m(R)  belongs  to  the  class. 

Proof  of  (iv) .  We  prove  this  by  induction  with  respect  to  A.  Take  (pi  A)  to  be 
“whenever  B  <  A  and  C  <  A  then  B<CorC<BorB  conv  C'”.  <p{  U)  follows 
from  the  fact  that  we  never  have  B  <  [7.  If  we  have  (pi  A)  and  B  <  Sue  (A),  then 
either  B  <  A  or  B  conv  A;  for  we  can  find  D  such  that  B  =5  I),  and  then 
D  <  Sue  (A)  can  be  proved  without  appealing  either  to  (1)  or  (5);  (4)  does  not 
apply,  so  we  must  have  D  conv  A.  Then,  if  B  <  Sue  (A)andC  <  Sue  (A),  we  have 
four  possibilities, 

B  conv  A,  C  conv  A, 

B  conv  A,  C  <  A, 

B  <  A,  C  conv  A, 

B  <  A,  C  <  A. 

In  the  first  case  B  conv  C,  in  the  second  C  <  B,  in  the  third  B  <  C,  and  in  the 
fourth  the  induction  hypothesis  applies. 

Now  suppose  that  Xufx .  R(n)  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  that 

Xufx.  R(n)  <  Xufx.R(Sin))  and  (p( R(n))> 

for  each  positive  integer  n,  and  that  A  conv  Xufx.  m(R).  Then,  if  B  <  A,  this 
means  that  B<  Xufx.  R(n)  for  some  n;  if  we  have  also  C  <  A,  then 
B  <  Xufx .  R(q),  C  <  Xufx .  R(q)  for  some  q.  Thus,  for  these  B  and  C,  the 
required  result  follows  from  (p(Xufx  .  R(q)). 

Proof  of  pv).  The  conditions  (C),  (D)  imply  that  the  classes  of  interconvertible 
formulae B,  B  <  Aarewell-orderedbytherelation“<”.Weprove(v)by(ordinary) 
transfinite  induction  with  respect  to  the  order  type  a  of  the  series  formed  by  these 
classes;  (a  is,  in  fact,  the  solution  of  the  equation  1  +  a  =  Ha,  but  we  do  not  need 
this).  We  suppose  then  that  (v)  is  true  for  all  order  types  less  than  a.  IfE  <  A,  then  E 
satisfies  the  conditions  of  (v)  and  the  corresponding  order  type  is  smaller:  E  is 
therefore  a  C-K  ordinal  formula.  This  expresses  all  consequences  of  the  induction 
hypothesis  that  we  need.  There  are  three  cases  to  consider: 

(x)  a  =  0. 

iy)  a  =  3  +  1. 

(z)  a  is  of  neither  of  the  forms  (x),  iy). 


168  I  Alan  Turing 


In  case  (x)  we  must  have  A  conv  U  on  account  of  (A).  In  case  (y)  there  is  a 
formula  D  such  that  D  <  A,  and  B  =£  D  whenever  B  <  A.  The  relation  D  <  A 
must  hold  in  virtue  of  either  (1),  (2),  (3),  or  (4).  It  cannot  be  in  virtue  of  (4);  for 
then  there  would  be  B,  B  <  A,  D  <  B  contrary  to  (C),  taken  in  conjunction  with 
the  definition  of  D.  If  it  is  in  virtue  of  (3),  then  a  is  the  upper  bound  of  a 
sequence  ai,  ct2, . . .  of  ordinals,  which  are  increasing  by  reason  of  (iii)  and  the 
conditions  Xufx .  R(n)  <  Xufx .  R(S(n))  in  (B).  This  is  inconsistent  with 
a  =(3+1.  This  means  that  (2)  applies  [after  we  have  eliminated  (1)  by 
suitable  conversions  on  A,  D]  and  we  see  that  A  conv  Sue  (D);  but,  since 
D  <  A,  D  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  and  A  must  therefore  be  a  C-K  ordinal 
formula  by  (8).  Now  take  case  (z).  It  is  impossible  for  A  to  be  of  the  form  Sue 
(D),  for  then  we  should  have  B  <  D  whenever  B  <  A,  and  this  would  mean  that 
we  had  case  (y).  Since  U  <  A,  there  must  be  an  F  such  that  F  <  A  is  demon¬ 
strable  either  by  (2)  or  by  (3)  (after  a  possible  conversion  on  A);  it  must  of 
course  be  demonstrable  by  (3).  Then  A  is  of  the  form  Xufx.  u(R).  By  (3),  (B) 
we  see  that  Xufx.  R(n)  <  A  for  each  positive  integer  n;  each  Xufx.  R(n)  is 
therefore  a  C-K  ordinal  formula.  Applying  (9),  (B)  we  see  that  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal 
formula. 

Proof  of  (vi) .  To  prove  the  first  half,  it  is  sufficient  to  find  a  method  whereby 
from  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  A  we  can  find  the  corresponding  ordinal  formula  St. 
For  then  there  is  a  formula  Ffi  such  that  Hi  (a)  conv  p  if  a  is  the  G.R.  of  A  and  p  is 
that  of  St.  H  is  then  to  be  defined  by 

H  — >  Xfl.form  (Hi(Gr(a))). 

The  method  of  finding  SI  may  be  replaced  by  a  method  of  finding  fl(m,  n), 
given  A  and  any  two  positive  integers  m,  n.  We  shall  arrange  the  method  so  that, 
whenever  A  is  not  an  ordinal  formula,  either  the  calculation  of  the  values  does 
not  terminate  or  else  the  values  are  not  consistent  with  SI  being  an  ordinal 
formula.  In  this  way  we  can  prove  the  second  half  of  (vi). 

Let  Ls  be  a  formula  such  that  Ls(A)  enumerates  the  classes  of  formulae 

B,  B  <  A  [i.e.  if  B  <  A  there  is  one  and  only  one  positive  integer  n  for  which 

Ls(A,  n)  conv  B[.  Then  the  rule  for  finding  the  value  of  fl(m,  n)  is  as  follows: 

First  determine  whether  U  =£  A  and  whether  A  is  convertible  to  the  form 
r(Suc,  U).  This  terminates  if  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula. 

If  A  conv  r(Suc,  U)  and  either  m  >  r  +  1  or  n  >  r  +  1,  then  the  value  is  4.  If 

m  <  n  =£  r+  1,  the  value  is  2.  If  n  <  m  r+  1,  the  value  is  1.  If 

m  =  n  =£  r  +  1,  the  value  is  3. 

If  A  is  not  convertible  to  this  form,  we  determine  whether  either  A  or  Ls(A,  m) 
is  convertible  to  the  form  Xufx.  u(R);  and  if  either  of  them  is,  we  verify  that 
Xufx .  R(n)  <  Xufx .  R(S(n)).  We  shall  eventually  come  to  an  affirmative  answer 
if  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  169 


Having  checked  this,  we  determine  concerning  m  and  n  whether 
Ls(A,  m)  <  Ls(A,  n),  Ls(A,  n)  <  Ls(A,  m),  or  m—  n,  and  the  value  is  to  be 
accordingly  1,  2,  or  3. 

If  A  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  this  process  certainly  terminates.  To  see  that 
the  values  so  calculated  correspond  to  an  ordinal  formula,  and  one  representing 
SA,  first  observe  that  this  is  so  when  EA  is  finite.  In  the  other  case  (iii)  and  (iv) 
show  that  Eb  determines  a  one-one  correspondence  between  the  ordinals 
|3,  1  |3  ss  SA,  and  the  classes  of  interconvertible  formulae  B,  B  <  A.  If  we 

take  G(m ,  n)  to  be  Ls(A,  m)  <  Ls(A,  n),  we  see  that  G(m,  n)  is  the  ordering 
relation  of  a  series  of  order  type  SA  and  on  the  other  hand  that  the  values  of 
fl(m,  n)  are  related  to  G(m ,  n)  as  on  p.  [162], 15 

To  prove  the  second  half  suppose  that  A  is  not  a  C-K  ordinal  formula.  Then 
one  of  the  conditions  (A)-(D)  in  (v)  must  not  be  satisfied.  If  (A)  is  not  satisfied 
we  shall  not  obtain  a  result  even  in  the  calculation  of  11(1,  1).  If  (B)  is  not 
satisfied,  we  shall  have  for  some  positive  integers  p  and  q, 

Ls(A,  p)  conv  kufx.  u{ R) 

but  not  X.i</3c.R(q)  <  kufx .  R(S(q)).  Then  the  process  of  calculating  H(p,  q) 
will  not  terminate.  In  case  of  failure  of  (C)  or  (D)  the  values  of  l!(m,  n)  may  all 
be  calculable,  but  if  so  conditions  ( a)-(f ),  p.  [162],  will  be  violated.  Thus,  if  A  is 
not  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  then  H( A)  is  not  an  ordinal  formula. 

I  propose  now  to  define  three  formulae  Sum,  Lim,  Inf  of  importance  in 
connection  with  ordinal  formulae.  Since  they  are  comparatively  simple,  they 
will  for  once  be  given  almost  in  full.  The  formula  Ug  is  one  with  the  property 
that  Ug(m)  is  convertible  to  the  formula  representing  the  largest  odd  integer 
dividing  m :  it  is  not  given  in  full.  P  is  the  predecessor  function;  P(S(m))  conv  m, 
P(l)  conv  1. 

A1  — >  kpxy .  p{kguv .  g(v,  u),  kuv.  u(I,  v),  x,  y), 

Hf  — >  km .  P(m(kguv .  g(v,  S{u)),  kuv  .  v{I,  u),  1,  2)), 

Bd  — >  kwvdaa'x .  Al(\/ .  w(a,  a,  w\d,  a1,  /)),  x,  4), 

Sum  — >  kww'pq .  Bd(w,  W ,  Hf(p),  Hf (q), 

Al(p,  M(q,  w'(Hf(p),  Hf(<j)),  1),  Al(S(q),  w(Hf(p),  Hf(q)),  2))), 

Lim  — >  kzpq .  {kab .  Bd(z(fl),  z(b),  Ug (p),  Ug (q),  Al(Dt(n,  b)  +  Dt(fo,  a), 
Dt(a,  b),  z(a,  Ug(p),  Ug (q))))}  (zu( 2,  p),  uj{2,  q)). 

Inf  — >  kwapq  .  Al (kf  .  w(a,  p,  w{a,  q,  /)),  w(p,  q),  4). 

The  essential  properties  of  these  formulae  are  described  by: 


15  The  order  type  is  (3,  where  1  +  (3  =  Ha;  but  (3  =  Ha,  since  Ha  is  infinite. 


170  I  Alan  Turing 


Al(2r  —  1,  m,  n)  conv  m,  Al(2r,  m,  n)  conv  n, 

Hf(2m)  conv  m,  Hf(2m  —  1)  conv  m, 

Bd(ft,  ft',  a,  a',  x)  conv  4,  unless  both 

ft(a,  a)  conv  3  and  ft' (a',  a')  conv  3, 
it  is  then  convertible  to  x. 

If  ft,  ft'  are  ordinal  formulae  representing  a,  3  respectively,  then 
Sum(ft,  ft')  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  a  +  3-  If  Z  is  a  W.F.F.  enumer¬ 
ating  a  sequence  of  ordinal  formulae  representing  oq,  a2>  . . . ,  then  Lim(Z)  is  an 
ordinal  formula  representing  the  infinite  sum  oq  +  a2  +  ot  3  . . .  If  ft  is  an  ordinal 
formula  representing  a,  then  Inf(ft)  enumerates  a  sequence  of  ordinal  formulae 
representing  all  the  ordinals  less  than  a  without  repetitions  other  than  repeti¬ 
tions  of  the  ordinal  0. 

To  prove  that  there  is  no  general  method  for  determining  about  a  formula 
whether  it  is  an  ordinal  formula,  we  use  an  argument  akin  to  that  leading  to  the 
Burali-Forti  paradox;  but  the  emphasis  and  the  conclusion  are  different.  Let  us 
suppose  that  such  an  algorithm  is  available.  This  enables  us  to  obtain  a  recursive 
enumeration  fti,  ft2,  ...  of  the  ordinal  formulae  in  normal  form.  There  is  a 
formula  Z  such  that  Z(n)  conv  ftn.  Now  Lim  (Z)  represents  an  ordinal  greater 
than  any  represented  by  an  ftn,  and  it  has  therefore  been  omitted  from  the 
enumeration. 

This  argument  proves  more  than  was  originally  asserted.  In  fact,  it  proves  that, 
if  we  take  any  class  E  of  ordinal  formulae  in  normal  form,  such  that,  if  A  is  any 
ordinal  formula,  then  there  is  a  formula  in  E  representing  the  same  ordinal  as  A, 
then  there  is  no  method  whereby  one  can  determine  whether  a  W.F.F.  in  normal 
form  belongs  to  E. 

8.  Ordinal  logics 

An  ordinal  logic  is  a  W.F.F.  A  such  that  A(ft)  is  a  logic  formula  whenever  ft  is  an 
ordinal  formula. 

This  definition  is  intended  to  bring  under  one  heading  a  number  of  ways  of 
constructing  logics  which  have  recently  been  proposed  or  which  are  suggested  by 
recent  advances.  In  this  section  I  propose  to  show  how  to  obtain  some  of  these 
ordinal  logics. 

Suppose  that  we  have  a  class  Wof  logical  systems.  The  symbols  used  in  each  of 
these  systems  are  the  same,  and  a  class  of  sequences  of  symbols  called  “formulae” 
is  defined,  independently  of  the  particular  system  in  W.  The  rules  of  procedure  of 
a  system  C  define  an  axiomatic  subset  of  the  formulae,  which  are  to  be  described 
as  the  “provable  formulae  of  C”.  Suppose  further  that  we  have  a  method  whereby, 
from  any  system  C  of  W,  we  can  obtain  a  new  system  C' ,  also  in  W,  and  such  that 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  171 


the  set  of  provable  formulae  of  C'  includes  the  provable  formulae  of  C  (we  shall 
be  most  interested  in  the  case  in  which  they  are  included  as  a  proper  subset).  It  is 
to  be  understood  that  this  “method”  is  an  effective  procedure  for  obtaining  the 
rules  of  procedure  of  C  from  those  of  C. 

Suppose  that  to  certain  of  the  formulae  of  W  we  make  number-theoretic 
theorems  correspond:  by  modifying  the  definition  of  formula,  we  may  suppose 
that  this  is  done  for  all  formulae.  We  shall  say  that  one  of  the  systems  C  is  valid  if 
the  provability  of  a  formula  in  C  implies  the  truth  of  the  corresponding  number- 
theoretic  theorem.  Now  let  the  relation  of  C  to  C  be  such  that  the  validity  of  C 
implies  the  validity  of  C',  and  let  there  be  a  valid  system  C0  in  W.  Finally,  suppose 
that,  given  any  computable  sequence  Q,  C2,  ...  of  systems  in  W,  the  “limit 
system”,  in  which  a  formula  is  provable  if  and  only  if  it  is  provable  in  one  of  the 
systems  Cj,  also  belongs  to  W.  These  limit  systems  are  to  be  regarded,  not  as 
functions  of  the  sequence  given  in  extension,  but  as  functions  of  the  rules  of 
formation  of  their  terms.  A  sequence  given  in  extension  may  be  described  by 
various  rules  of  formation,  and  there  will  be  several  corresponding  limit  systems. 
Each  of  these  may  be  described  as  a  limit  system  of  the  sequence. 

In  these  circumstances  we  may  construct  an  ordinal  logic.  Let  us  associate 
positive  integers  with  the  systems  in  such  a  way  that  to  each  C  there  corresponds 
a  positive  integer  me,  and  that  me  completely  describes  the  rules  of  procedure  of 
C.  Then  there  is  a  W.F.F.  K,  such  that 

K(mc)  conv  mp 

for  each  C  in  W,  and  there  is  a  W.F.F.  ©  such  that,  if  D(r)  conv  mCr  for  each 
positive  integer  r,  then  ©(D)  conv  me,  where  C  is  a  limit  system  of  Q,  C2,  . . . 
With  each  system  C  of  W  it  is  possible  to  associate  a  logic  formula  Le:  the 
relation  between  them  is  that,  if  G  is  a  formula  of  W  and  the  number-theoretic 
theorem  corresponding  to  G  (assumed  expressed  in  the  conversion  calculus 
form)  asserts  that  B  is  dual,  then  Lc(B)  conv  2  if  and  only  if  G  is  provable  in 
C.  There  is  a  W.F.F.  G  such  that 

G(mc)  conv  Lc 

for  each  C  of  W.  Put 

N  — >  .  G(a(@,  K,  mq,)). 

I  assert  that  N(A)  is  a  logic  formula  for  each  C-K  ordinal  formula  A,  and  that,  if 
A  <  B,  then  N(B)  is  more  complete  than  N(A),  provided  that  there  are  formulae 
provable  in  C'  but  not  in  C  for  each  valid  C  of  W. 

To  prove  this  we  shall  show  that  to  each  C-K  ordinal  formula  A  there 
corresponds  a  unique  system  C[A]  such  that: 

(i)  A(@,  K,  mCo)  conv  mc[A], 

and  that  it  further  satisfies: 


172  I  Alan  Turing 

(ii)  C[  U]  is  a  limit  system  of  Co,  C0',  . . . , 

(iii)  C  [Sue  (A)]  is  (C[A])', 

(iv)  C[Xufx .  u(R)]  is  a  limit  system  of  C[Xufx .  R(  1 )  ] ,  C[Xufx  .  R(2)  ] , 

A  and  Xufx.  m(R)  being  assumed  to  be  C-K  ordinal  formulae.  The  uniqueness 
of  the  system  follows  from  the  fact  that  me  determines  C  completely.  Let  us  try 
to  prove  the  existence  of  C[A]  for  each  C-K  ordinal  formula  A.  As  we  have  seen 
(p.  164)  it  is  sufficient  to  prove 

(fl)  C[  L7]  exists, 

( b )  if  C[A]  exists,  then  C[Suc  (A)]  exists, 

(c)  if  C[Xufx .  R(l)],  C[Xufx.  R(2)  ] ,  ...  exist,  then  C[Xufs  .  «(R)]  exists. 
Proof  of  (a). 

{Xy.K(y(7,  mCo))}(n)  conv  K(mQ)  conv  ma- 

for  all  positive  integers  n,  and  therefore,  by  the  definition  of  0,  there  is  a  system, 
which  we  call  C[  17]  and  which  is  a  limit  system  of  Cf,  Co',  ■  ■ .,  satisfying 

0(\y.K(y(7,  mcJ))  conv  mC[t/]. 

But,  on  the  other  hand, 

L/(0,  K,  mCo)  conv  0(\y.K(y(7,  mcJ)). 

This  proves  ( a )  and  incidentally  (ii). 

Proof  of  (b). 

Sue  (A,  0,  K,  mq,)  conv  K(A(0,  K,  mcJ) 
conv  K(mC[A]) 
conv  m(  ev¬ 
idence  C[Suc  (A)]  exists  and  is  given  by  (iii). 

Proof  of  (c). 

{{Xufx .  R}(0,  K,  mQ))}(n)  conv  {Xufx .  R(n)}(0,  K,  mCo) 

conv  me[x»yc .  R(«)] 

by  hypothesis.  Consequently,  by  the  definition  of  0,  there  exists  a  C  which  is  a 
limit  system  of 

C[\m/x.R(1)],  C[A.m/3c.R(2)],  . . ., 

and  satisfies 

0({\m/3c.  m(R)}(0,  K,  mq,))  conv  me- 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  173 


We  define  C[Xufx .  »(R)]  to  be  this  C.  We  then  have  (iv)  and 

{Xufx .  u(R)}(0,  K,  niq,)  conv  0({\m/3c.  R}(0,  K,  mq,)) 

COnV  niq[\u^ .  r/(R)]- 

This  completes  the  proof  of  the  properties  (i)-(iv).  From  (ii),  (iii),  (iv),  the 
fact  that  Co  is  valid,  and  that  C'  is  valid  when  C  is  valid,  we  infer  that  C[A]  is 
valid  for  each  C-K  ordinal  formula  A:  also  that  there  are  more  formulae  provable 
in  C[B]  than  in  C[A]  when  A  <  B.  The  truth  of  our  assertions  regarding  N  now 
follows  in  view  of  (i)  and  the  definitions  of  N  and  G. 

We  cannot  conclude  that  N  is  an  ordinal  logic,  since  the  formulae  A  are  C-K 
ordinal  formulae;  but  the  formula  H  enables  us  to  obtain  an  ordinal  logic  from 
N.  By  the  use  of  the  formula  Gr  we  obtain  a  formula  Tn  such  that,  if  A  has  a 
normal  form,  then  Tn(A)  enumerates  the  G.R.’s  of  the  formulae  into  which  A  is 
convertible.  Also  there  is  a  formula  Ck  such  that,  if  h  is  the  G.R.  of  a  formula 
H{ B),  then  Ck(h)  conv  B,  but  otherwise  Ck(h)  conv  U.  Since  H( B)  is  an 
ordinal  formula  only  if  B  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  Ck(Tn(fl,  n))  is  a  C-K 
ordinal  formula  for  each  ordinal  formula  fl  and  each  integer  n.  For  many  ordinal 
formulae  it  will  be  convertible  to  U,  but,  for  suitable  fl,  it  will  be  convertible  to 
any  given  C-K  ordinal  formula.  If  we  put 

A  — ►  \wa .  r(Xn .  N(Ck(Tn(w,  «))),  a), 

A  is  the  required  ordinal  logic.  In  fact,  on  account  of  the  properties  of 
r,  A(il,  A)  will  be  convertible  to  2  if  and  only  if  there  is  a  positive  integer  n 
such  that 


N(Ck(Tn(0,  n)),  A)  conv  2. 

If  fl  conv  H( B),  there  will  be  an  integer  n  such  that  Ck(Tn(0,  n))  conv  B,  and 
then 


N(Ck(Tn(il,  n)),  A)  conv  N(B,  A). 

For  any  n,  Ck(Tn(il,  n))  is  convertible  to  U or  to  some  B,  where  fl  conv  H{ B). 
Thus  A  (fl,  A)  conv  2  if  fl  conv  H(  B)  and  N(B,  A)  conv  2  or  if  N(L7,  A)  conv  2, 
but  not  in  any  other  case. 

We  may  now  specialize  and  consider  particular  classes  W  of  systems.  First  let 
us  try  to  construct  the  ordinal  logic  described  roughly  in  the  introduction.  For  W 
we  take  the  class  of  systems  arising  from  the  system  of  Principia  Mathematical 
by  adjoining  to  it  axiomatic  (in  the  sense  described  on  p.  [151])  sets  of  axioms.17 


16  Whitehead  and  Russell  [  1  ] .  The  axioms  and  rules  of  procedure  of  a  similar  system  P  will  be  found  in  a 
convenient  form  in  Godel  [1],  and  I  follow  Godel.  The  symbols  for  the  natural  numbers  in  P  are 
0,/0,  ffO,  . . . ,  /<»>0 . . .  Variables  with  the  suffix  “0”  stand  for  natural  numbers. 

17  It  is  sometimes  regarded  as  necessary  that  the  set  of  axioms  used  should  be  computable,  the  intention 
being  that  it  should  be  possible  to  verify  of  a  formula  reputed  to  be  an  axiom  whether  it  really  is  so.  We  can 


174  I  Alan  Turing 


Godel  has  shown  that  primitive  recursive  relations  can  be  expressed  by 
means  of  formulae  in  P. 1 8  In  fact,  there  is  a  rule  whereby,  given  the  recursion 
equations  defining  a  primitive  recursive  relation,  we  can  find  a  formula 
91 [xb,  . . . ,  zo]  such  that 

9I[/(mi)0,  ...,/(mJ0] 

is  provable  in  P ii F(nii,  . . . ,  mr )  is  true,  and  its  negation  is  provable  otherwise. 19 
Further,  there  is  a  method  by  which  we  can  determine  about  a  formula 
91  [xb,  •  •  ■  >  2o]  whether  it  arises  from  a  primitive  recursive  relation  in  this  way, 
and  by  which  we  can  find  the  equations  which  defined  the  relation.  Formulae  of 
this  kind  will  be  called  recursion  formulae.  We  shall  make  use  of  a  property  that 
they  possess,  which  we  cannot  prove  formally  here  without  giving  their  defini¬ 
tion  in  full,  but  which  is  essentially  trivial.  Db[xb,  >b]  is  to  stand  for  a  certain 
recursion  formula  such  that  Db[/^'!>0,  /("'o]  is  provable  in  P  if  m  =  2n  and  its 
negation  is  provable  otherwise.  Suppose  that  9I[xo]>  93[xo]  are  two  recursion 
formulae.  Then  the  theorem  which  I  am  assuming  is  that  there  is  a  recursion 
relation  (£,)(  ^[xo]  such  that  we  can  prove 

@?t,S3[*)]  =  (3y0)((Db[*b,  To]  ■  SltroD  v  (Db[/xb,  fy0]  .93[y0]))  (8.1) 

in  P. 

The  significant  formulae  in  any  of  our  extensions  of  P  are  those  of  the  form 

(xb)(3y0)9l[xb,  y0],  (8.2) 

where  9l[xo,  yo]  is  a  recursion  formula,  arising  from  the  relation  R(m,  n )  let  us 
say.  The  corresponding  number-theoretic  theorem  states  that  for  each  natural 
number  m  there  is  a  natural  number  n  such  that  R(m ,  n)  is  true. 

The  systems  in  W  which  are  not  valid  are  those  in  which  a  formula  of  the  form 
(8.2)  is  provable,  but  at  the  same  time  there  is  a  natural  number,  m  say,  such  that, 
for  each  natural  number  n,  R(m ,  n)  is  false.  This  means  to  say  that 
~  9l[/<m)0,  /(n) 0]  is  provable  for  each  natural  number  n.  Since  (8.2)  is  provable, 
(3xb)9I[/('")0,  y0]  is  provable,  so  that 

(3y0)9I[/(m)0,  yo],  ~9I[/(m)0,  0],  ~  9I[/('”)0,  /0],  . . .  (8.3) 

are  all  provable  in  the  system.  We  may  simplify  (8.3).  For  a  given  m  we  may  prove 
a  formula  of  the  form  9([/(m,0,  yo]  =  93 [yo]  in  P,  where  93  [xb]  is  a  recursion 

obtain  the  same  effect  with  axiomatic  sets  of  axioms  in  this  way.  In  the  rules  of  procedure  describing  which 
are  the  axioms,  we  incorporate  a  method  of  enumerating  them,  and  we  also  introduce  a  rule  that  in  the 
main  part  of  the  deduction,  whenever  we  write  down  an  axiom  as  such,  we  must  also  write  down  its 
position  in  the  enumeration.  It  is  possible  to  verify  whether  this  has  been  done  correctly. 

18  A  relation  F{m\,  . . .,  mr)  is  primitive  recursive  if  it  is  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for  the 

vanishing  of  a  primitive  recursive  function  . . . ,  mr). 

19  Capital  German  letters  will  be  used  to  stand  for  variable  or  undetermined  formulae  in  P.  An  expression 
such  as  91  [93,  (£]  stands  for  the  result  of  substituting  93  and  (£  for  xq  and  yo  in  91. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  175 


formula.  Thus  we  find  that  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for  a  system  of  W 
to  be  valid  is  that  for  no  recursion  formula  33  [*b]  are  all  of  the  formulae 

P*b)33 [*,],  ~  33[0],  ~  33[/o],  . . .  (8.4) 

provable.  An  important  consequence  of  this  is  that,  if 

«![*>],  %2[Xol  «„[*>] 

are  recursion  formulae,  if 

(3xo)s2li [xo]  v. .  .v  (3xo)?(„[xo]  (8.5) 

is  provable  in  C,  and  C  is  valid,  then  we  can  prove  21r[/(fl>0]  in  C  for  some 
natural  numbers  r,  a,  where  1  =£  r  =£  n.  Let  us  define  ®r  to  be  the  formula 

(3*b)9li  [xb]  v ...  v  (3xo)Slr[xb] 

and  then  define  @,  [xo]  recursively  by  the  conditibn  that  i  [xo ]  is  2li[xb]  and 
©r+i  [ xo ]  be  ©(jr)  5jr+1  [xo].  Now  I  say  that 

D  (3xo )@r[xb]  (8.6) 

is  provable  for  1  =£  r  =£  n.  It  is  clearly  provable  for  r  =  1:  suppose  it  to  be 
provable  for  a  given  r.  We  can  prove 

(yo)(3xb)Db[xb,  To] 

and  (yo)(3xo)Db[fxo,  fy0], 

from  which  we  obtain 

er[yo]  D  P*o)((Db[xb,  To]  ■  @r[y0])  v  (Dblfxo,  fy0]  Mr+l[yo])) 

and 

Str+itro]  3  P*b)((Db[*b,  To]  -©rbo])  v  (Db[fxo,fy0]  -  §Ir+i  [To]))- 

These  together  with  (8.1)  yield 

Py0)@r[yo]  v  Pro)Str+1[To]  D  (3xb)©c£„s,tr+i[xb], 

which  is  sufficient  to  prove  (8.6)  for  r  +  1.  Now,  since  (8.5)  is  provable  in  C, 
(3xb)@„[xb]  must  also  be  provable,  and,  since  C  is  valid,  this  means  that 
©«[/^ 0]  must  be  provable  for  some  natural  number  m.  From  (8.1)  and  the 
definition  of  @„[xo]  we  see  that  this  implies  that  ?lr[/(fl)0]  is  provable  for  some 
natural  numbers  a  and  r,  1  =£  r  =£  n. 

To  any  system  C  of  W  we  can  assign  a  primitive  recursive  relation  Pc(m,  n ) 
with  the  intuitive  meaning  “m  is  the  G.R.  of  a  proof  of  the  formula  whose  G.R.  is 
We  call  the  corresponding  recursion  formula  Proofc[xb,  To]  pe. 
Proofc[/(m)0,  /(n)0]  is  provable  when  Pc(m,  n )  is  true,  and  its  negation  is 


176  I  Alan  Turing 


provable  otherwise).  We  can  now  explain  what  is  the  relation  of  a  system  C'  to  its 
predecessor  C.  The  set  of  axioms  which  we  adjoin  to  P  to  obtain  C  consists  of 
those  adjoined  in  obtaining  C,  together  with  all  formulae  of  the  form 

P*o)  Proofed,  /(m)0]  Dg,  (8.7) 

where  m  is  the  G.R.  of  jy. 

We  want  to  show  that  a  contradiction  can  be  obtained  by  assuming  C  to  be 
invalid  but  C  to  be  valid.  Let  us  suppose  that  a  set  of  formulae  of  the  form  (8.4)  is 
provable  in  C'.  Let  21*,  2I2,  . . . ,  21*  be  those  axioms  of  C'  of  the  form  (8.7) 
which  are  used  in  the  proof  of  (3xo)23  [xp]  -  We  may  suppose  that  none  of  them  is 
provable  in  C.  Then  by  the  deduction  theorem  we  see  that 

(2f1.2t2...2I*)D(3xb))8[xb]  (8.8) 

is  provable  in  C.  Let  21/  be  (3xq)  Proofc[xb,/(m,)0]  D  Then  from  (8.8)  we 
find  that 

(3*b)  Proofc[xb,/(mi)0]  v...v  (3*o)  Proofc[xb,/(m,:)0]  v  (3*b)  33[xo] 

is  provable  in  C.  It  follows  from  a  result  which  we  have  just  proved  that 
either  23[/(c,0]  is  provable  for  some  natural  number  c,  or  else 
Proofc[/(”,0,/(m',0]  is  provable  in  C  for  some  natural  number  u  and  some 
l,  1  Z  =£  k:  but  this  would  mean  that  is  provable  in  C  (this  is  one  of  the 
points  where  we  assume  the  validity  of  C)  and  therefore  also  in  C',  contrary  to 
hypothesis.  Thus  23  [/^O]  must  be  provable  in  C';  but  we  are  also  assuming 
~  23[/(c)0]  to  be  provable  in  C .  There  is  therefore  a  contradiction  in  C' .  Let  us 
suppose  that  the  axioms  21/,  . . . ,  21*/,  of  the  form  (8.7),  when  adjoined  to  C  are 
sufficient  to  obtain  the  contradiction  and  that  none  of  these  axioms  is  that 
provable  in  C.  Then 

~  2l/v  ~  2t2'v . . .  v  ~  21*/' 

is  provable  in  C,  and  if  21/  is  (3xo)  Proofed, /(m'  }0]  D  then 
(3xo)  Proof c[xo,f{m'  '0]  v. .  .v  (3xb)  Proof [xb,/(”v  }0] 

is  provable  in  C.  But,  by  repetition  of  a  previous  argument,  this  means  that  21/  is 
provable  for  some  l,  1  =£  Z  =£  kr,  contrary  to  hypothesis.  This  is  the  required 
contradiction. 

We  may  now  construct  an  ordinal  logic  in  the  manner  described  on  pp.  [171- 
3].  We  shall,  however,  carry  out  the  construction  in  rather  more  detail,  and  with 
some  modifications  appropriate  to  the  particular  case.  Each  system  C  of  our  set 
Wmay  be  described  by  means  of  a  W.F.F.  Me  which  enumerates  the  G.R.’s  of  the 
axioms  of  C.  There  is  a  W.F.F.  E  such  that,  if  a  is  the  G.R.  of  some  proposition 
then  E(Mc,  a)  is  convertible  to  the  G.R.  of 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  177 


(3xo)  Proofed, /(n)0]  D  gf. 

If  a  is  not  the  G.R.  of  any  proposition  in  P,  then  E(Mc,  a)  is  to  be  convertible  to 
the  G.R.  of  0  =  0.  From  E  we  obtain  a  W.F.F.  K  such  that  K(Mc,  2n  +  1)  conv 
Mc( n),  K(Mc,  2n)  conv  E(Mc,  n).  The  successor  system  C'  is  defined  by  K{Mq) 
conv  Me'.  Let  us  choose  a  formula  G  such  that  G(Mc,  A)  conv  2  if  and  only  if  the 
number-theoretic  theorem  equivalent  to  “A  is  dual”  is  provable  in  C.  Then  we 
define  Ap  by 

Ap  — >  X .wa  .  r(\y .  G(Ck(Tn(tv,y),  \mn  .  n),w{3,  n)),K,MP)),  a). 

This  is  an  ordinal  logic  provided  that  P  is  valid. 

Another  ordinal  logic  of  this  type  has  in  effect  been  introduced  by  Church.20 
Superficially  this  ordinal  logic  seems  to  have  no  more  in  common  with  Ap  than 
that  they  both  arise  by  the  method  which  we  have  described,  which  uses  C-K 
ordinal  formulae.  The  initial  systems  are  entirely  different.  However,  in  the 
relation  between  C  and  C'  there  is  an  interesting  analogy.  In  Church’s  method 
the  step  from  C  to  C'  is  performed  by  means  of  subsidiary  axioms  of  which  the 
most  important  (Church  [2],  p.  88,  lm)  is  almost  a  direct  translation  into  his 
symbolism  of  the  rule  that  we  may  take  any  formula  of  the  form  (8.4)  as  an 
axiom.  There  are  other  extra  axioms,  however,  in  Church’s  system,  and  it  is 
therefore  not  unlikely  that  it  is  in  some  respects  more  complete  than  Ap. 

There  are  other  types  of  ordinal  logic,  apparently  quite  unrelated  to  the  type 
that  we  have  so  far  considered.  I  have  in  mind  two  types  of  ordinal  logic,  both  of 
which  can  be  best  described  directly  in  terms  of  ordinal  formulae  without  any 
reference  to  C-K  ordinal  formulae.  I  shall  describe  here  a  specimen  Ah  of  one  of 
these  types  of  ordinal  logic.  Ordinal  logics  of  this  kind  were  first  considered  by 
Hilbert  (Hilbert  [1],  183 ff.),  and  have  also  been  used  by  Tarski  (Tarski  [1], 
395  ff);  see  also  Godel  [1],  foot-note  48". 

Suppose  that  we  have  selected  a  particular  ordinal  formula  £1.  We  shall 
construct  a  modification  Pn  of  the  system  P  of  Godel  (see  foot-note  [16]  on 
p.  [173],  We  shall  say  that  a  natural  number  n  is  a  type  if  it  is  either  even  or 
2 p  —  1,  where  fl(p,p)  conv  3.  The  definition  of  a  variable  in  P  is  to  be  modified 
by  the  condition  that  the  only  admissible  subscripts  are  to  be  the  types  in  our 
sense.  Elementary  expressions  are  then  defined  as  in  P:  in  particular  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  an  elementary  expression  of  type  0  is  unchanged.  An  elementary  formula 
is  defined  to  be  a  sequence  of  symbols  of  the  form  where  21,„,  2f„  are 

elementary  expressions  of  types  m,  n  satisfying  one  of  the  conditions  (a),  ( b ),  (c). 

(a)  m  and  n  are  both  even  and  m  exceeds  n, 

( b )  m  is  odd  and  n  is  even, 

(c)  m  =  2p  —  1,  n  =  2q  —  1,  and  fl(p,  q)  conv  2. 


20  In  outline  Church  [1],  279-280.  In  greater  detail  Church  [2],  Chap.  X. 


178  I  Alan  Turing 


With  these  modifications  the  formal  development  of  Pq  is  the  same  as  that  of 
P.  We  want,  however,  to  have  a  method  of  associating  number-theoretic  the¬ 
orems  with  certain  of  the  formulae  of  Pq.  We  cannot  take  over  directly  the 
association  which  we  used  in  P.  Suppose  that  G  is  a  formula  in  P  interpretable  as 
a  number-theoretic  theorem  in  the  way  described  in  the  course  of  constructing 
Ap  (p.  [174]).  Then,  if  every  type  suffix  in  G  is  doubled,  we  shall  obtain  a 
formula  in  Pn  which  is  to  be  interpreted  as  the  same  number-theoretic  theorem. 
By  the  method  of  §6  we  can  now  obtain  from  Pn  a  formula  In  which  is  a  logic 
formula  if  Pa  is  valid;  in  fact,  given  SI  there  is  a  method  of  obtaining  Ln,  so  that 
there  is  a  formula  A#  such  that  A h(SI)  conv  Ln  for  each  ordinal  formula  SI. 

Having  now  familiarized  ourselves  with  ordinal  logics  by  means  of  these 
examples  we  may  begin  to  consider  general  questions  concerning  them. 


9.  Completeness  questions 

The  purpose  of  introducing  ordinal  logics  was  to  avoid  as  far  as  possible  the 
effects  of  Godel’s  theorem.  It  is  a  consequence  of  this  theorem,  suitably  modified, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  a  complete  logic  formula,  or  (roughly  speaking 
now)  a  complete  system  of  logic.  We  were  able,  however,  from  a  given  system  to 
obtain  a  more  complete  one  by  the  adjunction  as  axioms  of  formulae,  seen 
intuitively  to  be  correct,  but  which  the  Godel  theorem  shows  are  unprovable  in 
the  original  system;  from  this  we  obtained  a  yet  more  complete  system  by  a 
repetition  of  the  process,  and  so  on.21  We  found  that  the  repetition  of  the  process 
gave  us  a  new  system  for  each  C-K  ordinal  formula.  We  should  like  to  know 
whether  this  process  suffices,  or  whether  the  system  should  be  extended  in  other 
ways  as  well.  If  it  were  possible  to  determine  about  a  W.F.F.  in  normal  form 
whether  it  was  an  ordinal  formula,  we  should  know  for  certain  that  it  was 
necessary  to  make  extensions  in  other  ways.  In  fact  for  any  ordinal  formula  A 
it  would  then  be  possible  to  find  a  single  logic  formula  L  such  that,  if  A(Sl,  A) 
conv  2  for  some  ordinal  formula  ft,  then  L(A)  conv  2.  Since  L  must  be 
incomplete,  there  must  be  formulae  A  for  which  A{Sl,A)  is  not  convertible  to 
2  for  any  ordinal  formula  SI.  However,  in  view  of  the  fact,  proved  in  §7,  that 
there  is  no  method  of  determining  about  a  formula  in  normal  form  whether  it  is 
an  ordinal  formula,  the  case  does  not  arise,  and  there  is  still  a  possibility  that 
some  ordinal  logics  may  be  complete  in  some  sense.  There  is  a  quite  natural  way 
of  defining  completeness. 

Definition  of  completeness  of  an  ordinal  logic.  We  say  that  an  ordinal  logic  A  is 
complete  if  corresponding  to  each  dual  formula  A  there  is  an  ordinal  formula  SlA 
such  that  A(SIa,  A)  conv  2. 


21  In  the  case  of  Pwe  adjoined  all  of  the  axioms  (3x<))  Proof  |xo,/(w)0]  D  jy,  where  m  is  the  G.R.  of  ,y;  the 
Godel  theorem  shows  that  some  of  them  are  unprovable  in  P. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  179 


As  has  been  explained  in  §2,  the  reference  in  the  definition  to  the  existence  of 
Ha  for  each  A  is  to  be  understood  in  the  same  naive  way  as  any  reference  to 
existence  in  mathematics. 

There  is  room  for  modification  in  this  definition:  we  might  require  that  there 
is  a  formula  X  such  that  X(A)  conv  ilA,  X(A)  being  an  ordinal  formula  whenever 
A  is  dual.  There  is  no  need,  however,  to  discuss  the  relative  merits  of  these  two 
definitions,  because  in  all  cases  in  which  we  prove  an  ordinal  logic  to  be  complete 
we  shall  prove  it  to  be  complete  even  in  the  modified  sense;  but  in  cases  in  which 
we  prove  an  ordinal  logic  to  be  incomplete,  we  use  the  definition  as  it  stands. 

In  the  terminology  of  §6,  A  is  complete  if  the  class  of  logics  A(£l)  is  complete 
when  H  runs  through  all  ordinal  formulae. 

There  is  another  completeness  property  which  is  related  to  this  one.  Let  us  for 
the  moment  describe  an  ordinal  logic  A  as  all  inclusive  if  to  each  logic  formula  L 
there  corresponds  an  ordinal  formula  il(L)  such  that  A(fl(L))  is  as  complete  as  L. 
Clearly  every  all  inclusive  ordinal  logic  is  complete;  for,  if  A  is  dual,  then  8(A)  is  a 
logic  with  A  in  its  extent.  But,  if  A  is  complete  and 

Ai  — »  \kw  .  r(\ra .  8(4, 8(2,  k(w,  V(Nm(r))))  +  8(2,  Nm(r,  a)))), 

then  Ai(A)  is  an  all  inclusive  ordinal  logic.  For,  if  A  is  in  the  extent  of  A(flA)  for 
each  A,  and  we  put  il(x)  — >  flV( L),  then  I  say  that,  if  B  is  in  the  extent  of  L,  it 
must  be  in  the  extent  of  Ai(A, il(Lj).  In  fact,  we  see  that  Ai(A, Ov(l),  B)  is 
convertible  to 

T(Xra .  8(4, 8(2,  A(fty(L),  L(Nm(r))))  +  8(2,Nm(r,  u))),B). 

For  suitable  n,  Nm(n)  conv  L  and  then 

A(H^(L),  L(Nm(n)))  conv  2, 

Nm(n,  B)  conv  2, 

and  therefore,  by  the  properties  of  T  and  8 

Ai(A, fty(L),B)  conv  2. 

Conversely  Ai(A,  fly(L),  B)  can  be  convertible  to  2  only  if  both  Nm(n,  B)  and 
A(f2y(L),  F(Nm(n)))  are  convertible  to  2  for  some  positive  integer  n;  but,  if 
A(I7y(L),  F(Nm(n)))  conv  2,  then  Nm(n)  must  be  a  logic,  and,  since  Nm(n,  B) 
conv  2,  B  must  be  dual. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  our  definitions  of  completeness  refer  only  to 
number-theoretic  theorems.  Although  it  would  be  possible  to  introduce  formu¬ 
lae  analogous  to  ordinal  logics  which  would  prove  more  general  theorems  than 
number-theoretic  ones,  and  have  a  corresponding  definition  of  completeness, 
yet,  if  our  theorems  are  too  general,  we  shall  find  that  our  (modified)  ordinal 
logics  are  never  complete.  This  follows  from  the  argument  of  §4.  If  our  “oracle” 


180  I  Alan  Turing 


tells  us,  not  whether  any  given  number-theoretic  statement  is  true,  but  whether  a 
given  formula  is  an  ordinal  formula,  the  argument  still  applies,  and  we  find  that 
there  are  classes  of  problem  which  cannot  be  solved  by  a  uniform  process  even 
with  the  help  of  this  oracle.  This  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  there  is  no  ordinal 
logic  of  the  proposed  modified  type  which  is  complete  with  respect  to  these 
problems.  This  situation  becomes  more  definite  if  we  take  formulae  satisfying 
conditions  (a)-(e),  (/')  (as  described  at  the  end  of  §12)  instead  of  ordinal 
formulae;  it  is  then  not  possible  for  the  ordinal  logic  to  be  complete  with  respect 
to  any  class  of  problems  more  extensive  than  the  number-theoretic  problems. 

We  might  hope  to  obtain  some  intellectually  satisfying  system  of  logical 
inference  (for  the  proof  of  number-theoretic  theorems)  with  some  ordinal 
logic.  Godel’s  theorem  shows  that  such  a  system  cannot  be  wholly  mechanical;  but 
with  a  complete  ordinal  logic  we  should  be  able  to  confine  the  non-mechanical 
steps  entirely  to  verifications  that  particular  formulae  are  ordinal  formulae. 

We  might  also  expect  to  obtain  an  interesting  classification  of  number- 
theoretic  theorems  according  to  “depth”.  A  theorem  which  required  an  ordinal 
a  to  prove  it  would  be  deeper  than  one  which  could  be  proved  by  the  use  of  an 
ordinal  (3  less  than  a.  However,  this  presupposes  more  than  is  justified.  We  now 
define 

Invariance  of  ordinal  logics.  An  ordinal  logic  A  is  said  to  be  invariant  up  to 
an  ordinal  a  if,  whenever  fl,  SI'  are  ordinal  formulae  representing  the  same 
ordinal  less  than  a,  the  extent  of  A{Sl)  is  identical  with  the  extent  of  A(ft/)- 
An  ordinal  logic  is  invariant  if  it  is  invariant  up  to  each  ordinal  represented  by  an 
ordinal  formula. 

Clearly  the  classification  into  depths  presupposes  that  the  ordinal  logic  used  is 
invariant. 

Among  the  questions  that  we  should  now  like  to  ask  are 

(a)  Are  there  any  complete  ordinal  logics? 

( b )  Are  there  any  complete  invariant  ordinal  logics? 

To  these  we  might  have  added  “are  all  ordinal  logics  complete?”;  but  this  is 
trivial;  in  fact,  there  are  ordinal  logics  which  do  not  suffice  to  prove  any  number- 
theoretic  theorems  whatever. 

We  shall  now  show  that  (a)  must  be  answered  affirmatively.  In  fact,  we  can 
write  down  a  complete  ordinal  logic  at  once.  Put 

Od  — >  .  {\fmn .  Dt(/(m),  /(«))}(Xs.  9(\r .  r(I,  a(s)),  1,  s))) 

and  Comp  — >  A.wt.8(tv,  Od(a)). 

I  shall  show  that  Comp  is  a  complete  ordinal  logic. 

For  if,  Comp(il,  A)  conv  2,  then 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  181 


SI  conv  Od  (A) 

conv  Kmn .  Dt(3)(\r .  r(I,  A  (m)),  1,  m),  A  (n)),  1,  «))). 

fl(m,  n)  has  a  normal  form  if  is  an  ordinal  formula,  so  that  then 

9>(\r.r(I,  A(m)),  1) 

has  a  normal  form;  this  means  that  r (I,  A(m))  conv  2  some  r,  i.e.  A(m)  conv  2. 
Thus,  if  Compifl,  A)  conv  2  and  SI  is  an  ordinal  formula,  then  A  is  dual.  Comp 
is  therefore  an  ordinal  logic.  Now  suppose  conversely  that  A  is  dual.  I  shall  show 
that  Od(A)  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  the  ordinal  w.  For 

3 .  r(I,  A(m)),  1,  m)  conv  9  ( \r .  r(I,  2),  1,  m) 
conv  l(m)  conv  m, 

Od(A,  m,  n)  conv  Dt(m,  n), 

i.e.  Od(A)  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  the  same  ordinal  as  Dt.  But 
Comp(Od(A),  A)  conv  8(Od(A),  Od(A))  conv  2. 

This  proves  the  completeness  of  Comp. 

Of  course  Comp  is  not  the  kind  of  complete  ordinal  logic  that  we  should  really 
wish  to  use.  The  use  of  Comp  does  not  make  it  any  easier  to  see  that  A  is  dual.  In 
fact,  if  we  really  want  to  use  an  ordinal  logic,  a  proof  of  completeness  for  that 
particular  ordinal  logic  will  be  of  little  value;  the  ordinals  given  by  the  complete¬ 
ness  proof  will  not  be  ones  which  can  easily  be  seen  intuitively  to  be  ordinals.  The 
only  value  in  a  completeness  proof  of  this  kind  would  be  to  show  that,  if  any 
objection  is  to  be  raised  against  an  ordinal  logic,  it  must  be  on  account  of 
something  more  subtle  than  incompleteness. 

The  theorem  of  completeness  is  also  unexpected  in  that  the  ordinal  formulae 
used  are  all  formulae  representing  w.  This  is  contrary  to  our  intentions  in 
constructing  Ap  for  instance;  implicitly  we  had  in  mind  large  ordinals  expressed 
in  a  simple  manner.  Here  we  have  small  ordinals  expressed  in  a  very  complex  and 
artificial  way. 

Before  trying  to  solve  the  problem  ( b ),  let  us  see  how  far  Ap  and  Ah  are 
invariant.  We  should  certainly  not  expect  Ap  to  be  invariant,  since  the  extent  of 
A p(Sl)  will  depend  on  whether  SI  is  convertible  to  a  formula  of  the  form  H( A): 
but  suppose  that  we  call  an  ordinal  logic  A  “C-K  invariant  up  to  a”  if  the  extent 
of  A(H(A))  is  the  same  as  the  extent  of  A(H(B))  whenever  A  and  B  are  C-K 
ordinal  formulae  representing  the  same  ordinal  less  than  a.  How  far  is  Ap  C-K 
invariant?  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  it  is  C-K  invariant  up  to  any  finite  ordinal, 
that  is  to  say  up  to  w.  It  is  also  C-K  invariant  up  to  co  +  1,  as  follows  from  the  fact 
that  the  extent  of 


Kp(H{\ufx .  u(R))) 


182  I  Alan  Turing 

is  the  set-theoretic  sum  of  the  extents  of 

A P(H(\ufx .  R(l))),  A P{H(\ufx .  R(2))),  . . . 

However,  there  is  no  obvious  reason  for  believing  that  it  is  C-K  invariant  up  to 
«  +  2,  and  in  fact  it  is  demonstrable  that  this  is  not  the  case  (see  the  end  of  this 
section).  Let  us  find  out  what  happens  if  we  try  to  prove  that  the  extent  of 

Ap(H(Suc  (Xufx .  u( Ri)))) 

is  the  same  as  the  extent  of 

Ap(H(Suc  ( Xufx .  m(R2)))), 

where  Xufx .  m(Ri)  and  Xufx .  u( R2)  are  two  C-K  ordinal  formulae  representing  w. 
We  should  have  to  prove  that  a  formula  interpretable  as  a  number-theoretic 
theorem  is  provable  in  C[Suc  (Xufx .  «(Ri))]  if,  and  only  if,  it  is  provable 
in  C[Suc  (Xufx .  m(R2))].  Now  C[Suc  (Xufx .  m(Ri  ))]  is  obtained  from 
C[Xufx .  m(Ri)]  by  adjoining  all  axioms  oftheform 

(3xo)  Proof c[)„,/x.  u(Rl)]  [xo,  fm) 0]  D  %,  (9.1) 

where  m  is  the  G.R.  of  and  C[Suc  (Xufx .  m(R2))]  is  obtained  from 
C[Xufx.  u(R2)]  by  adjoining  all  axioms  of  the  form 

(3*b)  Proof c[xu/x.  h(r,)]  [xo,  /<m>0]  D  g.  (9.2) 

The  axioms  which  must  be  adjoined  to  P  to  obtain  C[Xufx .  m(Ri)]  are  essentially 
the  same  as  those  which  must  be  adjoined  to  obtain  the  system  C[Xufx .  m(R2)]: 
however  the  rules  of  procedure  which  have  to  he  applied  before  these  axioms  can 
be  written  down  are  in  general  quite  different  in  the  two  cases.  Consequently  (9.1) 
and  (9.2)  are  quite  different  axioms,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  their 
consequences  to  be  the  same.  A  proper  understanding  of  this  will  make  our 
treatment  of  question  (b)  much  more  intelligible.  See  also  footnote  [17]  on 
page  [173]. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  Ah-  This  ordinal  logic  is  invariant.  Suppose  that  il,  O' 
represent  the  same  ordinal,  and  suppose  that  we  have  a  proof  of  a  number- 
theoretic  theorem  G  in  Pa-  The  formula  expressing  the  number- theoretic  the¬ 
orem  does  not  involve  any  odd  types.  Now  there  is  a  one-one  correspondence 
between  the  odd  types  such  that  if  2m  —  1  corresponds  to  2m'  —  1  and  In  —  1  to 
2 n!  —  1  then  il(m,  n)  conv  2  implies  fl'(m',  n')  conv  2.  Let  us  modify  the  odd 
type-subscripts  occurring  in  the  proof  of  G,  replacing  each  by  its  mate  in  the 
one-one  correspondence.  There  results  a  proof  in  P(A>  with  the  same  end  formula 
G.  That  is  to  say  that  if  G  is  provable  in  Pa  it  is  provable  in  P(^ .  A h  is  invariant. 

The  question  ( b )  must  be  answered  negatively.  Much  more  can  be  proved,  but 
we  shall  first  prove  an  even  weaker  result  which  can  be  established  very  quickly, 
in  order  to  illustrate  the  method. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  183 


I  shall  prove  that  an  ordinal  logic  A  cannot  be  invariant  and  have  the  property 
that  the  extent  of  A(f  l)  is  a  strictly  increasing  function  of  the  ordinal  represented 
by  ft.  Suppose  that  A  has  these  properties;  then  we  shall  obtain  a  contradiction. 
Let  A  be  a  W.F.F.  in  normal  form  and  without  free  variables,  and  consider  the 
process  of  carrying  out  conversions  on  A(l)  until  we  have  shown  it  convertible  to 
2,  then  converting  A(2)  to  2,  then  A(3)  and  so  on:  suppose  that  after  r  steps  we 
are  still  performing  the  conversion  on  A(m,.).  There  is  a  formula  Jh  such  that 
Jh(A,  r)  conv  m,  for  each  positive  integer  r.  Now  let  Zbe  a  formula  such  that,  for 
each  positive  integer  n,  Z(n)  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  co",  and  suppose 
B  to  be  a  member  of  the  extent  of  A(Suc  (Lim(Z)))  but  not  of  the  extent  of 
A(Lim(Z)).  Put 

K*  — >  Xa.  A(Suc  (Lim(\r.  Z(Jh(a,  r)))),  B); 
then  K*  is  a  complete  logic.  For,  if  A  is  dual,  then 

Sue  (Lim(\r .  Z(Jh(A,  r)))) 

represents  the  ordinal  cow  +  1,  and  therefore  K*(A)  conv  2;  but,  if  A(c)  is  not 
convertible  to  2,  then 

Sue  (Lim(\r .  Z(Jh(A,  r)))) 

represents  an  ordinal  not  exceeding  coc  +  1,  and  K*(A)  is  therefore  not  convert¬ 
ible  to  2.  Since  there  are  no  complete  logic  formulae,  this  proves  our  assertion. 

We  may  now  prove  more  powerful  results. 

Incompleteness  theorems.  (A)  If  an  ordinal  logic  A  is  invariant  up  to  an 
ordinal  a,  then  for  any  ordinal  formula  ft  representing  an  ordinal  (3,  (3  <  a, 
the  extent  of  A  {ft)  is  contained  in  the  (set-theoretic)  sum  of  the  extents  of  the 
logics  A(P),  where  P  is  finite. 

(B)  If  an  ordinal  logic  A  is  C-K  invariant  up  to  an  ordinal  a,  then  for  any  C-K 
ordinal  formula  A  representing  an  ordinal  (3,  (3  <  a,  the  extent  of  A(H(A))  is 
contained  in  the  (set-theoretic)  sum  of  the  extents  of  the  logics  A(H(F)),  where 
F  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  representing  an  ordinal  less  than  co2. 

Proof  of  (A).  It  is  sufficient  to  prove  that,  if  ft  represents  an  ordinal 
y,  co  «  y  <  a,  then  the  extent  of  A(fl)  is  contained  in  the  set-theoretic  sum 
of  the  extents  of  the  logics  A(ft'),  where  ft'  represents  an  ordinal  less  than  y. 
The  ordinal  y  must  be  of  the  form  y0  +  p,  where  p  is  finite  and  represented  by  P 
say,  and  y0  is  not  the  successor  of  any  ordinal  and  is  not  less  than  co.  There  are 
two  cases  to  consider;  y0  =  co  and  y0  3=  2co.  In  each  of  them  we  shall  obtain  a 
contradiction  from  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  W.F.F.  B  such  that  A(ft,  B) 
conv  2  whenever  O  represents  y,  but  is  not  convertible  to  2  if  ft  represents  a 
smaller  ordinal.  Let  us  take  first  the  case  y0  &  2co.  Suppose  that  y0  =  co  + 


184  I  Alan  Turing 

and  that  ill  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  y, .  Let  A  be  any  W.F.F.  with  a 
normal  form  and  no  free  variables,  and  let  Zbe  the  class  of  those  positive  integers 
which  are  exceeded  by  all  integers  n  for  which  A(n)  is  not  convertible  to  2.  Let  E 
be  the  class  of  integers  2 p  such  that  H(p,  n)  conv  2  for  some  n  belonging  to  Z. 
The  class  E,  together  with  the  class  Q  of  all  odd  integers,  is  constructively 
enumerable.  It  is  evident  that  the  class  can  be  enumerated  with  repetitions, 
and  since  it  is  infinite  the  required  enumeration  can  be  obtained  by  striking 
out  the  repetitions.  There  is,  therefore,  a  formula  En  such  that  En(fi,  A,  r)  runs 
through  the  formulae  of  the  class  E  +  Q  without  repetitions  as  r  runs  through 
the  positive  integers.  We  define 

Rt  — >  \wamn .  Sum(Dt,  w,  En(w,  a,  m),  En(w,  a ,  «)). 

Then  Rt(ili,  A)  is  an  ordinal  formula  which  represents  y0  if  A  is  dual,  but  a 
smaller  ordinal  otherwise.  In  fact 

Rt(fti,  A,  m,  n)  conv  {Sum(Dt,  il1)}(En(il1,  A,  m),  En(fl!,  A,  n)). 

Now,  if  A  is  dual,  E  +  Q  includes  all  integers  m  for  which 
{Sum(Dt,  ili)}(m,  m)  conv  3. 

(This  depends  on  the  particular  form  that  we  have  chosen  for  the  formula  Sum.) 
Putting  “En^!,  A,  p)  conv  q”  for  M(p,  q),  we  see  that  condition  (7.4)  is 
satisfied,  so  that  R^f^,  A)  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  y0.  But,  if  A  is 
not  dual,  the  set  E  +  Q  consists  of  all  integers  m  for  which 

{Sum(Dt,  fl^Km,  r)  conv  2, 

where  r  depends  only  on  A.  In  this  case  Rt(fli,  A)  is  an  ordinal  formula 
representing  the  same  ordinal  as  Inf(Sum(Dt,  fli),  r),  and  this  is  smaller  than 
y0.  Now  consider  K: 

K  \a  .  A(Sum(Rt(fli,  A),  P),  B). 

If  A  is  dual,  K(A)  is  convertible  to  2  since  Sum(Rt(fli,  A),  P)  represents  y.  But, 
if  A  is  not  dual,  it  is  not  convertible  to  2,  since  Sum(Rt(ili,  A),  P)  then 
represents  an  ordinal  smaller  than  y.  In  K  we  therefore  have  a  complete  logic 
formula,  which  is  impossible. 

Now  we  take  the  case  y0  =  co.  We  introduce  a  W.F.F.  Mg  such  that  if  n  is  the 
D.N.  of  a  computing  machine  CYW,  and  if  by  the  m-th  complete  configuration  of 
TfYl  the  figure  0  has  been  printed,  then  Mg(n,  m)  is  convertible  to  \pq .  A1 
(4(P,  2p  +  2q),3, 4)  (which  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  the  ordinal  1), 
but  if  0  has  not  been  printed  it  is  convertible  to  \pq  .  p(q,  1, 4)  (which  represents 
0).  Now  consider 

M  — >  kn .  A(Sum(Lim(Mg(«)),  P),  B). 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  185 


If  the  machine  never  prints  0,  then  Lim(\r .  Mg(n,  r))  represents  w  and 
Sum(Lim(Mg(n)),  P)  represents  y.  This  means  that  M(n)  is  convertible  to  2. 
If,  however,  1%  never  prints  0,  Sum(Lim(Mg(n)), P)  represents  a  finite  ordinal 
and  M(n)  is  not  convertible  to  2.  In  M  we  therefore  have  means  of  determining 
about  a  machine  whether  it  ever  prints  0,  which  is  impossible  (Turing  [1],  §8). 22 
This  completes  the  proof  of  (A). 

Proof  of  (B).  It  is  sufficient  to  prove  that,  if  C  represents  an  ordinal 
7,  or2  s;  7  <  a,  then  the  extent  of  A(H(C))  is  included  in  the  set-theoretic  sum 
of  the  extents  of  A(H(G)),  where  G  represents  an  ordinal  less  than  7.  We  obtain  a 
contradiction  from  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  formula  B  which  is  in  the  extent  of 
A  (H  ( G) )  if  G  represents  7,  but  not  if  it  represents  any  smaller  ordinal.  The  ordinal  7 
is  of  the  form  8  +  or  +  £,  where  £  <  w2.  Let  D  be  a  C-K  ordinal  formula  repre¬ 
senting  8  and  Xufx.  Q(u,f  A(«,/,  x))  one  representing  a  +  £  whenever  A 
represents  a. 

We  now  define  a  formula  Hg.  Suppose  that  A  is  a  W.F.F.  in  normal  form  and 
without  free  variables;  consider  the  process  of  carrying  out  conversions  on  A(l) 
until  it  is  brought  into  the  form  2,  then  converting  A(2)  to  2,  then  A(3),  and  so 
on.  Suppose  that  at  the  r-th  step  of  this  process  we  are  doing  the  nr-th  step  in  the 
conversion  of  A(mr).  Thus,  for  instance,  if  A  is  not  convertible  to  2,  mr  can  never 
exceed  3.  Then  Hg(A,  r)  is  to  be  convertible  to  \/./(mr, nr)  for  each  positive 
integer  r.  Put 

Sq  — >  \dmn .  «(Suc,  m(Xaufx .  u(Xy .  y(Suc,  a{u,f ,  x))),  d(u,f,  x))), 

M  — >  Xaufx .  Q(u,/,  u(Xy .  Hg(a, y,  Sq(D)))), 

Kj  ->  Xa.  A(M(fl),B), 

then  I  say  that  Ki  is  a  complete  logic  formula.  Sq(D,  m,  n)  is  a  C-K  ordinal 
formula  representing  8  +  nun  +  n,  and  therefore  Hg(A,  r,  Sq(D))  represents  an 
ordinal  £r  which  increases  steadily  with  increasing  r,  and  tends  to  the  limit 
8  +  co2  if  A  is  dual.  Further 

Hg(A,r,Sq(D))  <  Hg(A,  S(r),  Sq(D)) 

for  each  positive  integer  r.  Therefore  Xufx .  u(Xy  .  Hg(A,  y,  Sq(D)))  is  a  C-K 
ordinal  formula  and  represents  the  limit  of  the  sequence  £  1  >  C2»  C3»  •  •  •  This  is 
8  +  co2  if  A  is  dual,  but  a  smaller  ordinal  otherwise.  Likewise  M(A)  represents  7  if 
A  is  dual,  but  is  a  smaller  ordinal  otherwise.  The  formula  B  therefore  belongs  to 
the  extent  of  A(H(M(A)))  if  and  only  if  A  is  dual,  and  this  implies  that  Ki  is  a 
complete  logic  formula,  as  was  asserted.  But  this  is  impossible  and  we  have  the 
required  contradiction. 


22  This  part  of  the  argument  can  equally  well  be  based  on  the  impossibility  of  determining  about  two 
W.F.F.  whether  they  are  interconvertible.  (Church  [3],  363.) 


186  I  Alan  Turing 


As  a  corollary  to  (A)  we  see  that  is  incomplete  and  in  fact  that  the  extent  of 
Atf(Dt)  contains  the  extent  of  AH(fl)  for  any  ordinal  formula  ft.  This  result, 
suggested  to  me  first  by  the  solution  of  question  ( b ),  may  also  be  obtained  more 
directly.  In  fact,  if  a  number-theoretic  theorem  can  be  proved  in  any  particular 
Pn,  it  can  also  be  proved  in  P\mn.  m(n,  /, 4) -  The  formulae  describing  number- 
theoretic  theorems  in  P  do  not  involve  more  than  a  finite  number  of  types,  type  3 
being  the  highest  necessary.  The  formulae  describing  the  number-theoretic 
theorems  in  any  Pn  will  be  obtained  by  doubling  the  type  subscripts.  Now 
suppose  that  we  have  a  proof  of  a  number-theoretic  theorem  G  in  To  and  that 
the  types  occurring  in  the  proof  are  among  0, 2, 4,  6,  t] ,  f2,  h,  ■  •  •  We  may  suppose 
that  they  have  been  arranged  with  all  the  even  types  preceding  all  the  odd  types, 
the  even  types  in  order  of  magnitude,  and  the  type  2m  —  1  preceding  2 n  —  1  if 
ft(m,  n)  conv  2.  Now  let  each  tr  be  replaced  by  10  +  2 r  throughout  the  proof  of 
G.  We  thus  obtain  a  proof  of  G  in  P\mn.(n,i, 4). 

As  with  problem  (a),  the  solution  of  problem  ( b )  does  not  require  the  use  of 
high  ordinals  [e.g.  if  we  make  the  assumption  that  the  extent  of  A(ft)  is  a 
steadily  increasing  function  of  the  ordinal  represented  by  ft  we  do  not  have  to 
consider  ordinals  higher  than  10  +  2] .  However,  if  we  restrict  what  we  are  to  call 
ordinal  formulae  in  some  way,  we  shall  have  corresponding  modified  problems 
(a)  and  (b);  the  solutions  will  presumably  be  essentially  the  same,  but  will  involve 
higher  ordinals.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  Prod  is  a  W.F.F.  with  the  property 
that  Prod(fti,  ft2)  is  an  ordinal  formula  representing  oqo^  when  ft^  ft2  are 
ordinal  formulae  representing  respectively,  and  suppose  that  we  call  a 

W.F.F.  a  1 -ordinal  formula  when  it  is  convertible  to  the  form  Sum 
(Prod(ft,  Dt),  P),  where  11,  P  are  ordinal  formulae  of  which  P  represents  a 
finite  ordinal.  We  may  define  1 -ordinal  logics,  1 -completeness  and  1 -invariance 
in  an  obvious  way,  and  obtain  a  solution  of  problem  ( b)  which  differs  from  the 
solution  in  the  ordinary  case  in  that  the  ordinals  less  than  or  take  the  place  of  the 
finite  ordinals.  More  generally  the  cases  that  I  have  in  mind  are  covered  by  the 
following  theorem. 

Suppose  that  we  have  a  class  V  of  formulae  representing  ordinals  in  some 
manner  which  we  do  not  propose  to  specify  definitely,  and  a  subset  U  of  the  class 
V  such  that: 

(i)  There  is  a  formula  «1>  such  that  if  T  enumerates  a  sequence  of  members  of 
U  representing  an  increasing  sequence  of  ordinals,  then  <&(T)  is  a  member 
of  U  representing  the  limit  of  the  sequence.23 

(ii)  There  is  a  formula  E  such  that  E(m,  n)  is  a  member  of  U  for  each  pair  of 
positive  integers  m,  n  and,  if  it  represents  Em,  „,  then  enl)  „  <  £m>t ,/  if  either 
m  <  m'  or  m  =  ?«',«<  H. 

23  The  subset  U  wholly  supersedes  V  in  what  follows.  The  introduction  of  V  serves  to  emphasise  the  fact 
that  the  set  of  ordinals  represented  by  members  of  U  may  have  gaps. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  187 


(iii)  There  is  a  formula  G  such  that,  if  A  is  a  member  of  U,  then  G(A)  is  a 
member  of  U  representing  a  larger  ordinal  than  does  A,  and  such  that 
G(E(m, n))  always  represents  an  ordinal  not  larger  than 

We  define  a  V-ordinal  logic  to  be  a  W.F.F.  A  such  that  A(A)  is  a  logic  whenever 
A  belongs  to  Vi  A  is  V-invariant  if  the  extent  of  A(A)  depends  only  on  the 
ordinal  represented  by  A.  Then  it  is  not  possible  for  a  V-ordinal  logic  A  to  be  V- 
invariant  and  have  the  property  that,  if  Ci  represents  a  greater  ordinal  than  C2 
(Ci  and  C2  both  being  members  of  U),  then  the  extent  of  A(Ci)  is  greater  than 
the  extent  of  A(C2). 

We  suppose  the  contrary.  Let  B  be  a  formula  belonging  to  the  extent  of 
A((<&(\r  .  E(r,  1))))  but  not  to  the  extent  of  A(<P(\r .  E(r,  1))), 
and  let 


K'  -»•  \a  .  A(G(<I>(\r .  Hg(a,  r,E)),B). 

Then  K'  is  a  complete  logic.  For 

Hg(A,  r, E)  conv  E(m,.,nr). 

E(mr,nr)  is  a  sequence  of  V-ordinal  formulae  representing  an  increasing  se¬ 
quence  of  ordinals.  Their  limit  is  represented  by  <J>(\r .  Hg(A,  r,  E));  let  us  see 
what  this  limit  is.  First  suppose  that  A  is  dual:  then  mr  tends  to  infinity  as  r  tends 
to  infinity,  and  «l>(X.r .  Hg(A,  r,  E))  therefore  represents  the  same  ordinal  as 
<l>(\r  .  E(r,  1)).  In  this  case  we  must  have 

K'(A)  conv  2. 

Now  suppose  that  A  is  not  dual:  mr  is  eventually  equal  to  some  constant  number, 
a  say,  and  <&(\r .  Hg(A,  r,  E))  represents  the  same  ordinal  as  <I>(\r .  E(a,  r)), 
which  is  smaller  than  that  represented  by  <I>(\r .  E(r,  1)).  B  cannot  therefore 
belong  to  the  extent  of  A(G(0(X.r .  Hg(A,  r,  E)))),  and  K'(A)  is  not  convertible 
to  2.  We  have  proved  that  K'  is  a  complete  logic,  which  is  impossible. 

This  theorem  can  no  doubt  be  improved  in  many  ways.  However,  it  is 
sufficiently  general  to  show  that,  with  almost  any  reasonable  notation  for  ordin¬ 
als,  completeness  is  incompatible  with  invariance. 

We  can  still  give  a  certain  meaning  to  the  classification  into  depths  with  highly 
restricted  kinds  of  ordinals.  Suppose  that  we  take  a  particular  ordinal  logic  A  and 
a  particular  ordinal  formula  'VP'  representing  the  ordinal  a  say  (preferably  a  large 
one),  and  that  we  restrict  ourselves  to  ordinal  formulae  of  the  form  Inf("'P',  a). 
We  then  have  a  classification  into  depths,  but  the  extents  of  all  the  logics  which 
we  so  obtain  are  contained  in  the  extent  of  a  single  logic. 

We  now  attempt  a  problem  of  a  rather  different  character,  that  of  the  complete¬ 
ness  of  A p.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  this  ordinal  logic  is  complete.  I  cannot  at 
present  give  a  proof  of  this,  but  I  can  give  a  proof  that  it  is  complete  as  regards  a 


188  I  Alan  Turing 


simpler  type  of  theorem  than  the  number-theoretic  theorems,  viz.  those  of  form 
“6(x)  vanishes  identically”,  where  6(x)  is  primitive  recursive.  The  proofwill  have  to 
be  much  abbreviated  since  we  do  not  wish  to  go  into  the  formal  details  of  the  system 
P.  Also  there  is  a  certain  lack  of  definiteness  in  the  problem  as  at  present  stated,  owing 
to  the  fact  that  the  formulae  G,  E,  Mp  were  not  completely  defined.  Our  attitude  here 
is  that  it  is  open  to  the  sceptical  reader  to  give  detailed  definitions  for  these  formulae 
and  then  verify  that  the  remaining  details  of  the  proof  can  be  filled  in,  using  his 
definition.  It  is  not  asserted  that  these  details  can  be  filled  in  whatever  be  the 
definitions  of  G,  E,  Mp  consistent  with  the  properties  already  required  of  them, 
only  that  they  can  be  filled  in  with  the  more  natural  definitions. 

I  shall  prove  the  completeness  theorem  in  the  following  form.  If  58  [xq]  is  a 
recursion  formula  and  if  33  [0],  58 1/0],  . . .  are  all  provable  in  P,  then  there  is  a  C- 
K  ordinal  formula  A  such  that  (xb)58[xo]  is  provable  in  the  system  PA  of  logic 
obtained  from  P  by  adjoining  as  axioms  all  formulae  whose  G.R.’s  are  of  the  form 

A (Xmn .  m(rn{2,  «),  -tn(3,  «)),  K,  MP,  r) 

(provided  they  represent  propositions). 

First  let  us  define  the  formula  A.  Suppose  that  D  is  a  W.F.F.  with  the  property 
that  D(n)  conv  2  if  58  [/(n_1)0]  is  provable  in  P,  but  D(n)  conv  1  if  ~  58 
is  provable  in  P  (P  is  being  assumed  consistent).  Let  0  be  defined  by 

0  — >  {Xvu  .  u(v(v,  u))}(Xvu  .  u(v(v,  «))), 

and  let  Vi  be  a  formula  with  the  properties 

Vi(2)  conv  Xu.  h(Suc,  U ), 

Vi(l)  conv  Xu .  u(I,  ©(Sue)). 

The  existence  of  such  a  formula  is  established  in  Kleene  [1],  corollary  on  p.  220. 
Now  put 

A*  — >  Xufx.  u(Xy .  Vi(D(y),  y,  u,f,x)), 

A  ->  Sue  (A*). 

I  assert  that  A*,  A  are  C-K  ordinal  formulae  whenever  it  is  true  that  58  [0] ,  58  [/ 0] , 

. . .  are  all  provable  in  P.  For  in  this  case  A*  is  Xufx  .  m(R)>  where 

R  — >  Xy.  Vi(D(y),y,  u,f,x), 

and  then 

Xufx  .  R(n)  conv  Xufx  .  Vi(D(n),  n,  »,/,  x) 
conv  Xufx  .  Vi(2,  n,  «,/,  x) 
conv  Xufx.  {Xn.  n(Suc,  (7)}(n,  u,f,x ) 

conv  Xufx.  n(Suc,  U,  u,fx),  which  is  a  C-K  ordinal  formula, 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  189 


Xufx .  S(n,  Sue,  U,  u,f  x)  conv  Sue  ( Xufx .  n(Suc,  U,  u,f,  x)). 

These  relations  hold  for  an  arbitrary  positive  integer  n  and  therefore  A*  is  a  C-K 
ordinal  formula  [condition  (9)  p.  [163]]:  it  follows  immediately  that  A  is  also  a 
C-K  ordinal  formula.  It  remains  to  prove  that  (xo)'©  [xo]  is  provable  in  PA.  To  do 
this  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  structure  of  A*  in  the  case  in  which  (xo)33[xo] 
is  false.  Let  us  suppose  that  ~  33[/(a-1)0]  is  true,  so  that  D(a)  conv  1,  and  let  us 
consider  B  where 


B  — >  Xufx .  Vi(D(a),  a,  u,  f  x). 

If  A*  was  a  C-K  ordinal  formula,  then  B  would  be  a  member  of  its  fundamental 
sequence;  but 

B  conv  Xufx .  Vi(l,  a,  u,  /,  x) 

conv  Xufx .  {Xu  .  u(I,  0(Suc))}(a,  u,  /,  x) 

conv  Xufx .  0(Suc,  u,  f,  x) 

conv  Xufx .  {\w  .  m(0(m))}(Suc,  m,  /,  x) 

conv  Xufx .  Sue  (0(Suc),  u,  f,  x) 

conv  Sue  (Xufx.  0(Suc,  u,  f  x)) 

conv  Sue  (B).  (9.3) 

This,  of  course,  implies  that  B  <  B  and  therefore  that  B  is  no  C-K  ordinal 
formula.  This,  although  fundamental  in  the  possibility  of  proving  our  complete¬ 
ness  theorem,  does  not  form  an  actual  step  in  the  argument.  Roughly  speaking, 
our  argument  amounts  to  this.  The  relation  (9.3)  implies  that  the  system  PB  is 
inconsistent  and  therefore  that  PA‘  is  inconsistent  and  indeed  we  can  prove  in  P 
(and  a  fortiori  in  PA)  that  ~  (xo)®[xb]  implies  the  inconsistency  of  PA>.  On  the 
other  hand  in  PA  we  can  prove  the  consistency  of  PA.  The  inconsistency  of  PB  is 
proved  by  the  Godel  argument.  Let  us  return  to  the  details. 

The  axioms  in  PB  are  those  whose  G.R.’s  are  of  the  form 

B (Xmn.  m(w(2,  n),  vj(3,  «)),  K,  MP,  r). 

When  we  replace  B,  by  Sue  (B),  this  becomes 

Sue  (B,  Xmn.  m(w( 2,  n ),  w(3,  n)),  K,  Mp,  r) 

conv  K(B(Xmn.  m(vj(2,  n),  uj(3,n)),  K,  MP,  r)) 
conv  B (Xmn.  m(vj( 2,  n),  w(3 , »)),  K,  MP,  p) 

if  r  conv  2p  +  1, 

conv  E(B(Xmn.  m(vj(2 ,  n),  zu(3,  n)),  K,  MP),  p) 


if  r  conv  2p. 


190  I  Alan  Turing 


When  we  remember  the  essential  property  of  the  formula  E,  we  see  that  the 
axioms  of  PB  include  all  formulae  of  the  form 

(3xb)  Proofp-  [x0,  f(q)0]  D  g, 

where  q  is  the  G.R.  of  the  formula 
Let  b  be  the  G.R.  of  the  formula  21. 

~  (3xb)(3y0){Proofp"[x0,  y0]  .Sb[z0,  z0,  y0] }-  (21) 

Sb[xo,  yo,  Zo]  is  a  particular  recursion  formula  such  that  Sb[/(,)0,  /(m> 0,  /("'0] 
holds  if  and  only  if  n  is  the  G.R.  of  the  result  of  substituting/1”1^  for  zq  in  the  for¬ 
mula  whose  G.R.  is  1  at  all  points  where  Zo  is  free.  Let  p  be  the  G.R.  of  the  formula  6. 

~  (3xb)(3yo){Proofp.[xb,  y0]  •  Sb[/(b)0,  fw0,  *,]}.  (©) 

Then  we  have  as  an  axiom  in  P 

(3xb)Proofp-[xb,  /(p,0]  D  ©, 

and  we  can  prove  in  PA 

(xo){Sb[/(w0,  fw 0,  x0]=x0=  f® 0},  (9.4) 

since  S  is  the  result  of  substituting  /(fc) 0  for  zq  in  21;  hence 

~  (3yo)Pr°ofpB  [y0>  /(p)0]  (9.5) 

is  provable  in  P.  Using  (9.4)  again,  we  see  that  ©  can  be  proved  in  PB.  But,  if  we 
can  prove  ©  in  PB,  then  we  can  prove  its  provability  in  PB,  the  proof  being  in  P ; 
i.e.  we  can  prove 

(3xo)Proofp»  [xq,  fip) 0] 

in  P  (since  p  is  the  G.R.  of  ©).  But  this  contradicts  (9.5),  so  that,  if 

~  83[/(a-1)0] 

is  true,  we  can  prove  a  contradiction  in  PB  or  in  PA  .  Now  I  assert  that  the  whole 
argument  up  to  this  point  can  be  carried  through  formally  in  the  system  P,  in 
fact,  that,  if  c  is  the  G.R.  of  ~  (0  =  0),  then 

~  (xo)23[xb]  ^  (3v0)ProofpA*  [v0,  f(c) 0]  (9.6) 

is  provable  in  P.  I  shall  not  attempt  to  give  any  more  detailed  proof  of  this 
assertion. 

The  formula 

(3xb)Proofpv  [xq,  f{c) 0]  D  ~  (0  =  0) 
is  an  axiom  in  PA.  Combining  (9.6),  (9.7)  we  obtain  (xo)2?[xq]  in  PA. 


(9.7) 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  191 


This  completeness  theorem  as  usual  is  of  no  value.  Although  it  shows,  for 
instance,  that  it  is  possible  to  prove  Fermat’s  last  theorem  with  Ap  (if  it  is  true) 
yet  the  truth  of  the  theorem  would  really  be  assumed  by  taking  a  certain  formula 
as  an  ordinal  formula. 

That  Ap  is  not  invariant  may  be  proved  easily  by  our  general  theorem; 
alternatively  it  follows  from  the  fact  that,  in  proving  our  partial  completeness 
theorem,  we  never  used  ordinals  higher  than  co  +  1.  This  fact  can  also  be  used  to 
prove  that  Ap  is  not  C-K  invariant  up  to  w  +  2. 


10.  The  continuum  hypothesis.  A  digression 

The  methods  of  §9  may  be  applied  to  problems  which  are  constructive  analogues 
of  the  continuum  hypothesis  problem.  The  continuum  hypothesis  asserts  that 
2^°  =  Hi,  in  other  words  that,  if  «i  is  the  smallest  ordinal  a  greater  than  co  such 
that  a  series  with  order  type  a  cannot  be  put  into  one-one  correspondence  with 
the  positive  integers,  then  the  ordinals  less  than  coi  can  be  put  into  one-one 
correspondence  with  the  subsets  of  the  positive  integers.  To  obtain  a  constructive 
analogue  of  this  proposition  we  may  replace  the  ordinals  less  than  cl>i  either  by 
the  ordinal  formulae,  or  by  the  ordinals  represented  by  them;  we  may  replace  the 
subsets  of  the  positive  integers  either  by  the  computable  sequences  of  figures  0,  1, 
or  by  the  description  numbers  of  the  machines  which  compute  these  sequences. 
In  the  manner  in  which  the  correspondence  is  to  be  set  up  there  is  also  more  than 
one  possibility.  Thus,  even  when  we  use  only  one  kind  of  ordinal  formula,  there 
is  still  great  ambiguity  concerning  what  the  constructive  analogue  of  the  con¬ 
tinuum  hypothesis  should  be.  I  shall  prove  a  single  result  in  this  connection.24 
A  number  of  others  may  be  proved  in  the  same  way. 

We  ask  “Is  it  possible  to  find  a  computable  function  of  ordinal  formulae 
determining  a  one-one  correspondence  between  the  ordinals  represented  by 
ordinal  formulae  and  the  computable  sequences  of  figures  0,  1?”  More  accurately, 
“Is  there  a  formula  F  such  that  if  ft  is  an  ordinal  formula  and  n  a  positive  integer 
then  F(ft,  n)  is  convertible  to  1  or  to  2,  and  such  that  F(ft,  n)  conv  F(ft',  n)  for 
each  positive  integer  n,  if  and  only  if  ft  and  ft'  represent  the  same  ordinal?”  The 
answer  is  “No”,  as  will  be  seen  to  be  a  consequence  of  the  following  argument: 
there  is  no  formula  F  such  that  F(ft)  enumerates  one  sequence  of  integers  (each 
being  1  or  2)  when  ft  represents  oj  and  enumerates  another  sequence  when  fl 
represents  0.  If  there  is  such  an  F,  then  there  is  an  a  such  that  F(ft,  a)  conv  (Dt, 
a)  if  fl  represents  co  but  F(ft,  a)  and  F(Dt,  a)  are  convertible  to  different  integers 
(1  or  2)  if  ft  represents  0.  To  obtain  a  contradiction  from  this  we  introduce 


24  A  suggestion  to  consider  this  problem  came  to  me  indirectly  from  F.  Bernstein.  A  related  problem  was 
suggested  by  P.  Bernays. 


192  I  Alan  Turing 


a  W.F.F.  Gm  not  unlike  Mg.  If  the  machine  TIT  whose  D.N.  is  n  has  printed  0  by 
the  time  the  m-th  complete  configuration  is  reached  then 

Gm(n,  m)  conv  \mn .  m{n,  I,  4); 

otherwise  Gm(n,  m)  conv  \pq  .  A1(4(F’,  2 p  +  2 q),  3,  4).  Now  consider  F(Dt,  a) 
and  F(Lim(Gm(n)),  a).  If  ‘TIL  never  prints  0,  Lim(Gm(n))  represents  the  ordinal 
w.  Otherwise  it  represents  0.  Consequently  these  two  formulae  are  convertible  to 
one  another  if  and  only  if  L)%  never  prints  0.  This  gives  us  a  means  of  determin¬ 
ing  about  any  machine  whether  it  ever  prints  0,  which  is  impossible. 

Results  of  this  kind  have  of  course  no  real  relevance  for  the  classical  con¬ 
tinuum  hypothesis. 


11.  The  purpose  of  ordinal  logics 

Mathematical  reasoning  may  be  regarded  rather  schematically  as  the  exercise  of  a 
combination  of  two  faculties,  which  we  may  call  intuition  and  ingenuity.251  The 
activity  of  the  intuition  consists  in  making  spontaneous  judgments  which  are  not 
the  result  of  conscious  trains  of  reasoning.  These  judgments  are  often  but  by  no 
means  invariably  correct  (leaving  aside  the  question  what  is  meant  by  “correct”). 
Often  it  is  possible  to  find  some  other  way  of  verifying  the  correctness  of  an 
intuitive  judgment.  We  may,  for  instance,  judge  that  all  positive  integers  are 
uniquely  factorizable  into  primes;  a  detailed  mathematical  argument  leads  to  the 
same  result.  This  argument  will  also  involve  intuitive  judgments,  but  they  will  be 
less  open  to  criticism  than  the  original  judgment  about  factorization.  I  shall  not 
attempt  to  explain  this  idea  of  “intuition”  any  more  explicitly. 

The  exercise  of  ingenuity  in  mathematics  consists  in  aiding  the  intuition 
through  suitable  arrangements  of  propositions,  and  perhaps  geometrical  figures 
or  drawings.  It  is  intended  that  when  these  are  really  well  arranged  the  validity  of 
the  intuitive  steps  which  are  required  cannot  seriously  be  doubted. 

The  parts  played  by  these  two  faculties  differ  of  course  from  occasion  to 
occasion,  and  from  mathematician  to  mathematician.  This  arbitrariness  can  be 
removed  by  the  introduction  of  a  formal  logic.  The  necessity  for  using  the 
intuition  is  then  greatly  reduced  by  setting  down  formal  rules  for  carrying  out 
inferences  which  are  always  intuitively  valid.  When  working  with  a  formal  logic, 
the  idea  of  ingenuity  takes  a  more  definite  shape.  In  general  a  formal  logic,  will 
be  framed  so  as  to  admit  a  considerable  variety  of  possible  steps  in  any  stage  in  a 
proof.  Ingenuity  will  then  determine  which  steps  are  the  more  profitable  for  the 
purpose  of  proving  a  particular  proposition.  In  pre-Godel  times  it  was  thought 


25  We  are  leaving  out  of  account  that  most  important  faculty  which  distinguishes  topics  of  interest  from 
others;  in  fact,  we  are  regarding  the  function  of  the  mathematician  as  simply  to  determine  the  truth  or  falsity 
of  propositions. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  193 


by  some  that  it  would  probably  be  possible  to  carry  this  programme  to  such  a 
point  that  all  the  intuitive  judgments  of  mathematics  could  be  replaced  by  a 
finite  number  of  these  rules.  The  necessity  for  intuition  would  then  be  entirely 
eliminated. 

In  our  discussions,  however,  we  have  gone  to  the  opposite  extreme  and 
eliminated  not  intuition  but  ingenuity,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  our 
aim  has  been  in  much  the  same  direction.  We  have  been  trying  to  see  how  far  it  is 
possible  to  eliminate  intuition,  and  leave  only  ingenuity.  We  do  not  mind  how 
much  ingenuity  is  required,  and  therefore  assume  it  to  be  available  in  unlimited 
supply.  In  our  metamathematical  discussions  we  actually  express  this  assumption 
rather  differently.  We  are  always  able  to  obtain  from  the  rules  of  a  formal  logic  a 
method  of  enumerating  the  propositions  proved  by  its  means.  We  then  imagine 
that  all  proofs  take  the  form  of  a  search  through  this  enumeration  for  the 
theorem  for  which  a  proof  is  desired.  In  this  way  ingenuity  is  replaced  by 
patience.  In  these  heuristic  discussions,  however,  it  is  better  not  to  make  this 
reduction. 

In  consequence  of  the  impossibility  of  finding  a  formal  logic  which  wholly 
eliminates  the  necessity  of  using  intuition,  we  naturally  turn  to  “non-construct- 
ive”  systems  of  logic  with  which  not  all  the  steps  in  a  proof  are  mechanical,  some 
being  intuitive.  An  example  of  a  non- constructive  logic  is  afforded  by  any  ordinal 
logic.  When  we  have  an  ordinal  logic,  we  are  in  a  position  to  prove  number- 
theoretic  theorems  by  the  intuitive  steps  of  recognizing  formulae  as  ordinal 
formulae,  and  the  mechanical  steps  of  carrying  out  conversions.  What  properties 
do  we  desire  a  non-constructive  logic  to  have  if  we  are  to  make  use  of  it  for  the 
expression  of  mathematical  proofs?  We  want  it  to  show  quite  clearly  when  a  step 
makes  use  of  intuition,  and  when  it  is  purely  formal.  The  strain  put  on  the 
intuition  should  be  a  minimum.  Most  important  of  all,  it  must  be  beyond  all 
reasonable  doubt  that  the  logic  leads  to  correct  results  whenever  the  intuitive 
steps  are  correct.26  It  is  also  desirable  that  the  logic  shall  be  adequate  for  the 
expression  of  number-theoretic  theorems,  in  order  that  it  may  be  used  in 
metamathematical  discussions  (cf.  §5). 

Of  the  particular  ordinal  logics  that  we  have  discussed,  AH  and  A P  certainly 
will  not  satisfy  us.  In  the  case  of  A#  we  are  in  no  better  position  than  with  a 
constructive  logic.  In  the  case  of  AP  (and  for  that  matter  also  AH)  we  are  by  no 
means  certain  that  we  shall  never  obtain  any  but  true  results,  because  we  do  not 
know  whether  all  the  number-theoretic  theorems  provable  in  the  system  P  are 
true.  To  take  AP  as  a  fundamental  non-constructive  logic  for  metamathematical 


26  This  requirement  is  very  vague.  It  is  not  of  course  intended  that  the  criterion  of  the  correctness  of  the 
intuitive  steps  be  the  correctness  of  the  final  result.  The  meaning  becomes  clearer  if  each  intuitive  step  is 
regarded  as  a  judgment  that  a  particular  proposition  is  true.  In  the  case  of  an  ordinal  logic  it  is  always  a 
judgment  that  a  formula  is  an  ordinal  formula,  and  this  is  equivalent  to  judging  that  a  number-theoretic 
proposition  is  true.  In  this  case  then  the  requirement  is  that  the  reputed  ordinal  logic  is  an  ordinal  logic. 


194  I  Alan  Turing 


arguments  would  be  most  unsound.  There  remains  the  system  of  Church  which 
is  free  from  these  objections.  It  is  probably  complete  (although  this  would  not 
necessarily  mean  much)  and  it  is  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that  it  always  leads  to 
correct  results.27  In  the  next  section  I  propose  to  describe  another  ordinal 
logic,  of  a  very  different  type,  which  is  suggested  by  the  work  of  Gentzen  and 
which  should  also  be  adequate  for  the  formalization  of  number-theoretic 
theorems.  In  particular  it  should  be  suitable  for  proofs  of  metamathema- 
tical  theorems  (cf.  §5). 


12.  Gentzen  type  ordinal  logics 

In  proving  the  consistency  of  a  certain  system  of  formal  logic  Gentzen  (Gentzen 
[  1  ] )  has  made  use  of  the  principle  of  transfinite  induction  for  ordinals  less  than 
e0,  and  has  suggested  that  it  is  to  be  expected  that  transfinite  induction  carried 
sufficiently  far  would  suffice  to  solve  all  problems  of  consistency.  Another 
suggestion  of  basing  systems  of  logic  on  transfinite  induction  has  been  made 
by  Zermelo  (Zermelo  [1]).  In  this  section  I  propose  to  show  how  this  method  of 
proof  may  be  put  into  the  form  of  a  formal  (non-constructive)  logic,  and 
afterwards  to  obtain  from  it  an  ordinal  logic. 

We  can  express  the  Gentzen  method  of  proof  formally  in  this  way.  Let  us  take 
the  system  P  and  adjoin  to  it  an  axiom  with  the  intuitive  meaning  that  the 
W.F.F.  ft  is  an  ordinal  formula,  whenever  we  feel  certain  that  ft  is  an  ordinal 
formula.  This  is  a  non-constructive  system  of  logic  which  may  easily  be  put  into 
the  form  of  an  ordinal  logic.  By  the  method  of  §6  we  make  correspond  to  the 
system  of  logic  consisting  of  P  with  the  axiom  Sin  adjoined  a  logic  formula 
La'.  L[i  is  an  effectively  calculable  function  of  ft,  and  there  is  therefore  a  formula 
Ag1  such  that  Ag  (ft)  conv  Ln  for  each  formula  ft.  Ag1  is  certainly  not  an 
ordinal  logic  unless  P  is  valid,  and  therefore  consistent.  This  formalization  of 
Gentzen’s  idea  would  therefore  not  be  applicable  for  the  problem  with  which 
Gentzen  himself  was  concerned,  for  he  was  proving  the  consistency  of  a  system 
weaker  than  P.  However,  there  are  other  ways  in  which  the  Gentzen  method  of 
proof  can  be  formalized.  I  shall  explain  one,  beginning  by  describing  a  certain 
logical  calculus. 

The  symbols  of  the  calculus  are/,  x,  \  i,  0,  S,  R,  T,  A,  E,  |,  ©  ,  !,  (, ),  =,  and 
the  comma  For  clarity  we  shall  use  various  sizes  of  brackets  (,)  in  the 
following.  We  use  capital  German  letters  to  stand  for  variable  or  undetermined 
sequences  of  these  symbols. 


27  This  ordinal  logic  arises  from  a  certain  system  Co  in  essentially  the  same  way  as  Ap  arose  from  P.  By 
an  argument  similar  to  one  occurring  in  §8  we  can  show  that  the  ordinal  logic  leads  to  correct  results  if 
and  only  if  Co  is  valid;  the  validity  of  Co  is  proved  in  Church  [  1  ] ,  making  use  of  the  results  of  Church  and 
Rosser  [1]. 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  195 


It  is  to  be  understood  that  the  relations  that  we  are  about  to  define  hold  only 
when  compelled  to  do  so  by  the  conditions  that  we  lay  down.  The  conditions 
should  be  taken  together  as  a  simultaneous  inductive  definition  of  all  the 
relations  involved. 

Suffixes 

i  is  a  suffix.  If  @  is  a  suffix  then  is  a  suffix. 

Indices 

1  is  an  index.  If  3  is  an  index  then  31  is  an  index. 

Numerical  variables 

If  @  is  a  suffix  then  x@  is  a  numerical  variable. 

Functional  variables 

If  ©  is  a  suffix  and  3  is  an  index,  then  /© 3  is  a  functional  variable  of  index  3. 

Arguments 

(,)  is  an  argument  of  index '.  If  (§1)  is  an  argument  of  index  3  and  if  is  a  term, 
then  (21if ,)  is  an  argument  of  index  3\ 

Numerals 

0  is  a  numeral. 

If  91  is  a  numeral,  then  S(,  9?,)  is  a  numeral. 

In  metamathematical  statements  we  shall  denote  the  numeral  in  which  S 
occurs  r  times  by  S^(,  0,). 

Expressions  of  a  given  index 

A  functional  variable  of  index  3  is  an  expression  of  index  3. 

R,  S  are  expressions  of  index  111 , 11  respectively. 

If  91  is  a  numeral,  then  it  is  also  an  expression  of  index 1 . 

Suppose  that  ©  is  an  expression  of  index  3,  one  of  index  31  and  ^  one  of 
index  3111;  then  (T@)  and  (A@)  are  expressions  of  index  3,  while  (£©)  and 
(@|^))  and  (©  0  and  (@  !  Sp  !  S?)  are  expressions  of  index  31. 

Function  constants 

An  expression  of  index  3  in  which  no  functional  variable  occurs  is  a  function 
constant  of  index  3.  If  in  addition  R  does  not  occur,  the  expression  is  called  a 
primitive  function  constant. 

Terms 

0  is  a  term. 

Every  numerical  variable  is  a  term. 


196  I  Alan  Turing 

If  ©  is  an  expression  of  index  3  and  (SI)  is  an  argument  of  index  3,  then 
©(SI)  is  a  term. 

Equations 

If  3)  and  3^  are  terms,  then  3)  =  X1  is  an  equation. 

Provable  equations 

We  define  what  is  meant  by  the  provable  equations  relative  to  a  given  set  of 
equations  as  axioms. 

(a)  The  provable  equations  include  all  the  axioms.  The  axioms  are  of  the  form 
of  equations  in  which  the  symbols  T,  A,  E,  |,  0  ,  !  do  not  appear. 

( b )  If®  is  an  expression  of  index  3  and  (SI)  is  an  argument  of  index  3,  then 

(r®)(Stx1,xu,)  =  ®(Sfx11,x1,) 

is  a  provable  equation. 

(c)  If  @  is  an  expression  of  index  31,  and  (SI)  is  an  argument  of  index  3,  then 

(A©)(Sfx1, )  =  ©(,*!  SI) 

is  a  provable  equation. 

(d)  If  @  is  an  expression  of  index  3,  and  (SI)  is  an  argument  of  index  3,  then 

(E©)(8t*i,)  =  ©(SI) 

is  a  provable  equation. 

(e)  If  ©  is  an  expression  of  index  3  and  iQ  is  one  of  index  S1,  and  (SI)  is  an 
argument  of  index  3,  then 

(®|$)(8t)  =  $(si®(8t),) 

is  a  provable  equation. 

(/)  If  is  an  expression  of  index  \  then  9I(, )  =  is  a  provable  equation, 
(g)  If  ©  is  an  expression  of  index  3  and  one  of  index  3111,  and  (SI)  an 
argument  of  index  31,  then 

(©OlfXSlO,  )  =  ©($!) 

and  (@©®)(SIS(,  *!,),)  =®(SIX!,  S(,  X!,),  (©  ©  ®)(Sbd, ),  ) 
are  provable  equations.  If  in  addition  is  an  expression  of  index  31  and 

.R^,@(siS(,  xu),  ),  X, ,  j  =  0 

is  provable,  then 

(@!®!£)(S10,)  =  @(SI) 

and 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  197 


=  Si  ((21<£>(21S(,  *!, ), ),  S(,  xu  ),(©!$!  <£>)(2I£(2lS(,  *!,  ),),)>) 

are  provable. 

( h )  If  $  =  2)'  and  11  =  II'  are  provable,  where  2",  S£',  il  and  If  are  terms, 
then  lb  =  11  and  the  result  of  substituting  If  for  It  at  any  particular 
occurrence  in  '3  =  3)'  are  provable  equations. 

( i )  The  result  of  substituting  any  term  for  a  particular  numerical  variable 
throughout  a  provable  equation  is  provable. 

( j)  Suppose  that  ©,  ©'  are  expressions  of  index  3,  that  (21)  is  an  argument 
of  index  3  not  containing  the  numerical  variable  X  and  that 
©(210, )  =  @'(210, )  is  provable.  Also  suppose  that,  if  we  add 

<35(2136, )  =  ©'(21$,) 

to  the  axioms  and  restrict  (i)  so  that  it  can  never  be  applied  to  the 
numerical  variable  .6,  then 

@(2lS(,£,),)  =  C35'(215(,  36),) 

becomes  a  provable  equation;  in  the  hypothetical  proof  of  this  equation 
this  rule  (j)  itself  may  be  used  provided  that  a  different  variable  is  chosen 
to  take  the  part  of  .6. 

Under  these  conditions  <35(2136, )  =  ©'(213:, )  is  a  provable  equation. 

(k)  Suppose  that  @,  ©',  if)  are  expressions  of  index  31,  that  (21)  is  an 
argument  of  index  3  not  containing  the  numerical  variable  .6  and  that 

,£(21S(,  £,),),  S(,  £,),)  =0 

are  provable  equations.  Suppose  also  that,  if  we  add 

©  ^21£>(2IS(,  X,  ),))=©'  (2I£>(2lS(,  X, ), )  j 

to  the  axioms,  and  again  restrict  ( i )  so  that  it  does  not  apply  to  X,  then 

©(2136, )  =  ©'(21$,)  (12.1) 

becomes  a  provable  equation;  in  the  hypothetical  proof  of  (12.1)  the  rule 
(k)  may  be  used  if  a  different  variable  takes  the  part  of  .6. 

Under  these  conditions  (12.1)  is  a  provable  equation. 

We  have  now  completed  the  definition  of  a  provable  equation  relative  to  a 
given  set  of  axioms.  Next  we  shall  show  how  to  obtain  an  ordinal  logic  from  this 
calculus.  The  first  step  is  to  set  up  a  correspondence  between  some  of  the 
equations  and  number-theoretic  theorems,  in  other  words  to  show  how  they 


©(210,)  =  ©'(210,)  and  R 


198  I  Alan  Turing 


can  be  interpreted  as  number-theoretic  theorems.  Let  @  be  a  primitive  function 
constant  of  index 111 .  @  describes  a  certain  primitive  recursive  function  <p{m,  n), 
determined  by  the  condition  that,  for  all  natural  numbers  m,  n,  the  equation 

©(,  S(m)(,  0,),  S(n)(,  0,),)  =  SWm’n))(,  0,) 

is  provable  without  using  the  axioms  (a).  Suppose  also  that  $  is  an  expression  of 
index  3.  Then  to  the  equation 

®(>  xu  £(,  *i>)>)  =  0 

we  make  correspond  the  number-theoretic  theorem  which  asserts  that  for  each 
natural  number  m  there  is  a  natural  number  n  such  that  n)  =  0.  (The 

circumstance  that  there  is  more  than  one  equation  to  represent  each  number- 
theoretic  theorem  could  be  avoided  by  a  trivial  but  inconvenient  modification  of 
the  calculus.) 

Now  let  us  suppose  that  some  definite  method  is  chosen  for  describing  the  sets  of 
axioms  by  means  of  positive  integers,  the  null  set  of  axioms  being  described  by  the 
integer  1.  By  an  argument  used  in  §6  there  is  a  W.F.F.  X  such  that,  if  ris  the  integer 
describing  a  set  A  of  axioms,  then  X(r)  is  a  logic  formula  enabling  us  to  prove 
just  those  number- theoretic  theorems  which  are  associated  with  equations 
provable  with  the  above  described  calculus,  the  axioms  being  those  described  by 
the  number  r. 

I  explain  two  ways  in  which  the  construction  of  the  ordinal  logic  may  be 
completed. 

In  the  first  method  we  make  use  of  the  theory  of  general  recursive  functions 
(Kleene  [2]).  Let  us  consider  all  equations  of  the  form 

r(,  s(m)(,  0,),  S(n)(,  0, ),)  =  S®(,  0,)  (12.2) 

which  are  obtainable  from  the  axioms  by  the  use  of  rules  (h),  (i).  It  is  a  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  theorem  of  equivalence  of  \-definable  and  general  recursive  func¬ 
tions  (Kleene  [3])  that,  if  r(m,  n)  is  any  X-definable  function  of  two  variables,  then 
we  can  choose  the  axioms  so  that  (12.2)  with  p  =  r{m,  n)  is  obtainable  in  this  way 
for  each  pair  of  natural  numbers  m,  n,  and  no  equation  of  the  form 

S(m)(,0,)  =  S(n)(,0,)  (m^n)  (12.3) 

is  obtainable.  In  particular,  this  is  the  case  if  r(  m,  n )  is  defined  by  the  condition  that 

Ll(m,  n)  conv  S(p)  implies  p  =  r(m,  n), 
r(0,  n)  =  1,  all  n  >  0,  r(0,  0)  =  2, 


where  Si  is  an  ordinal  formula.  There  is  a  method  for  obtaining  the  axioms  given 
the  ordinal  formula,  and  consequently  a  formula  Rec  such  that,  for  any  ordinal 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  199 

formula  SI,  Rec  (SI)  conv  m,  where  m  is  the  integer  describing  the  set  of  axioms 
corresponding  to  SI.  Then  the  formula 

A q2  — >  \w.x((Rec  (tv)) 

is  an  ordinal  logic.  Let  us  leave  the  proof  of  this  aside  for  the  present. 

Our  second  ordinal  logic  is  to  be  constructed  by  a  method  not  unlike  the  one 
which  we  used  in  constructing  Ap.  We  begin  by  assigning  ordinal  formulae  to  all 
sets  of  axioms  satisfying  certain  conditions.  For  this  purpose  we  again  consider 
that  part  of  the  calculus  which  is  obtained  by  restricting  “expressions”  to  be 
functional  variables  or  R  or  S  and  restricting  the  meaning  of  “term”  accordingly; 
the  new  provable  equations  are  given  by  conditions  (a),  ( h ),  (i),  together  with  an 
extra  condition  (/). 

(Z)  The  equation 

r(,  0,  S(,  xlt),)  =  0 

is  provable. 

We  could  design  a  machine  which  would  obtain  all  equations  of  the  form 
( 12.2),  with  m  ^  n,  provable  in  this  sense,  and  all  of  the  form  ( 12.3),  except  that 
it  would  cease  to  obtain  any  more  equations  when  it  had  once  obtained  one  of 
the  latter  “contradictory”  equations.  From  the  description  of  the  machine  we 
obtain  a  formula  SI  such  that 

fl(m,  n)  conv  2  if  R S(m-1)(,  0,),  0,),)  =0 

is  obtained  by  the  machine, 

fl(m,  n)  conv  1  if  R S<"~1)(,  0,),  0,),)  =0 

is  obtained  by  the  machine,  and 

H(m,  m)  conv  3  always. 

The  formula  SI  is  an  effectively  calculable  function  of  the  set  of  axioms,  and 
therefore  also  of  m:  consequently  there  is  a  formula  M  such  that  M(m)  conv  SI 
when  m  describes  the  set  of  axioms.  Now  let  Cm  be  a  formula  such  that,  if  b  is  the 
G.R.  of  a  formula  M(m),  then  Cm(fr)  conv  m,  but  otherwise  Cm(Z?)  conv  1.  Let 

Ag3  — >  Rwa .  T  ^Rn  .  £(Cm(Tn(w,  n)),  a'j  . 

Then  Ag3  (SI,  A)  conv  2  if  and  only  if  il  conv  M( m),  where  m  describes  a  set  of 
axioms  which,  taken  with  our  calculus,  suffices  to  prove  the  equation  which  is, 
roughly  speaking,  equivalent  to  “A  is  dual”.  To  prove  that  Ag3  is  an  ordinal  logic,  it 
is  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  calculus  with  the  axioms  described  by  m  proves  only 
true  number-theoretic  theorems  when  SI  is  an  ordinal  formula.  This  condition  on 


200  I  Alan  Turing 


m  may  also  be  expressed  in  this  way.  Let  us  put  m  <C  n  if  we  can  prove 
R^,  5(m)(,0, ),  S{n)(,  0, ),  ^  =  0  with  (a),  ( h ),  (i),  (Z):  the  condition  is  that 
m  <C  n  is  a  well  ordering  of  the  natural  numbers  and  that  no  contradictory 
equation  (12.3)  is  provable  with  the  same  rules  ( a ),  (Zi),  (i),  (Z).  Let  us  say  that 
such  a  set  of  axioms  is  admissible.  Ag3  is  an  ordinal  logic  if  the  calculus  leads  to 
none  but  true  number-theoretic  theorems  when  an  admissible  set  of  axioms  is 
used. 

In  the  case  of  Ac  ,  Rec  (ft)  describes  an  admissible  set  of  axioms  whenever  ft 
is  an  ordinal  formula.  Aq2  therefore  is  an  ordinal  logic  if  the  calculus  leads  to 
correct  results  when  admissible  axioms  are  used. 

To  prove  that  admissible  axioms  have  the  required  property,  I  do  not  attempt 
to  do  more  than  show  how  interpretations  can  be  given  to  the  equations  of  the 
calculus  so  that  the  rules  of  inference  ( a)—(  k)  become  intuitively  valid  methods  of 
deduction,  and  so  that  the  interpretation  agrees  with  our  convention  regarding 
number-theoretic  theorems. 

Each  expression  is  the  name  of  a  function,  which  may  be  only  partially 
defined.  The  expression  S  corresponds  simply  to  the  successor  function.  If  @  is 
either  R  or  a  functional  variable  and  has  p  +  1  symbols  in  its  index,  then  it 
corresponds  to  a  function  g  of  p  natural  numbers  defined  as  follows.  If 

©(,  S(ri)(,  0, ),  S^\,  0, ),  . . . ,  S^\,  0, ),  )  =  S{,)(,  0, ) 

is  provable  by  the  use  of  (a),  (h),  (i),  (Z)  only,  then  g(ri,  r2,  . . . ,  rp)  has  the  value 
p.  It  may  not  be  defined  for  all  arguments,  but  its  value  is  always  unique,  for 
otherwise  we  could  prove  a  “contradictory”  equation  and  M(m)  would  then  not 
be  an  ordinal  formula.  The  functions  corresponding  to  the  other  expressions  are 
essentially  defined  by  ( b)—{f ).  For  example,  if  g  is  the  function  corresponding  to 
©  and  g'  that  corresponding  to  (T®),  then 

g'(ti,  r2,  . . . ,  rp,  Z,  m)  =  g(ru  r2,  . . . ,  rp,  m,  Z). 

The  values  of  the  functions  are  clearly  unique  (when  defined  at  all)  if  given  by  one 
of  (b)-(e).  The  case  (/)  is  less  obvious  since  the  function  defined  appears  also  in  the 
definiens.  Ido  not  treatthe  caseof(@  0  S’), since  this  is  the  well-known  definition 
by  primitive  recursion,  but  I  shall  show  that  the  values  of  the  function  correspond¬ 
ing  to  (©!$!#)  are  unique.  Without  loss  of  generality  we  may  suppose  that  (31) 
in  (/)  is  of  index1.  We  have  then  to  show  that,  if  h(m)  is  the  function  corres¬ 
ponding  to  Sp  and  r(m,  n)  that  corresponding  to  R ,  and  k{u,  v,  w )  is  a  given 
function  and  a  a  given  natural  number,  then  the  equations 

1(0)  =  a,  (a) 


l(m+  1)  =  k^h(m+  1),  m+  1,  l[h(m+  1 ) ) ^ 


(P) 


Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  201 


do  not  ever  assign  two  different  values  for  the  function  l(m).  Consider  those 
values  of  r  for  which  we  obtain  more  than  one  value  of  l(r),  and  suppose  that 
there  is  at  least  one  such.  Clearly  0  is  not  one,  for  1(0)  can  be  defined  only  by  (a). 
Since  the  relation  <  is  a  well  ordering,  there  is  an  integer  r0  such  that 
r0  >  0,  Z(ro)  is  not  unique,  and  if  s  yL  r0  and  l(s)  is  not  unique  then  r0  <C  s.  We 
may  put  s=  h(r0),  for,  if  z(h(r0))  were  unique,  then  Z(r0),  defined  by  ((3), 

would  be  unique.  But  r^h(ro),  ro^  =  0  i.e.  s  <C  Jo.  There  is,  therefore,  no  inte¬ 
ger  r  for  which  we  obtain  more  than  one  value  for  the  function  l(r). 

Our  interpretation  of  expressions  as  functions  gives  us  an  immediate  inter¬ 
pretation  for  equations  with  no  numerical  variables.  In  general  we  interpret  an 
equation  with  numerical  variables  as  the  (infinite)  conjunction  of  all  equations 
obtainable  by  replacing  the  variables  by  numerals.  With  this  interpretation  (h), 
( i )  are  seen  to  be  valid  methods  of  proof.  In  ( j )  the  provability  of 


©(siSUi,),)  =  ©'(hs(,*1>),  ) 


when  )  =  ©^Slxi,)  is  assumed  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the 

implication  between  these  equations  holds  for  all  substitutions  of  numerals  for 
X\ .  To  justify  this,  one  should  satisfy  oneself  that  these  implications  always  hold 
when  the  hypothetical  proof  can  be  carried  out.  The  rule  of  procedure  ( j )  is  now 
seen  to  be  simply  mathematical  induction.  The  rule  ( k )  is  a  form  of  transfinite 
induction.  In  proving  the  validity  of  ( k )  we  may  again  suppose  (21)  is  of  index1. 
Let  r(m,  n),g(m),  gi(m),  h(n )  be  the  functions  corresponding  respectively  to 
R,  @,  Ob',  £>.  We  shall  prove  that,  if  g(0)  =  g'(O)  and  r^h(n),  n)  =  0  for  each 
positive  integer  n  and  if  g(n  +  1)  =  g'(n  +  1)  whenever  g(h(n  +  1)^ 
=  g'(ji(n+  1)^,  then  g(n)  =  g'(n)  for  each  natural  number  n.  We  consider 
the  class  of  natural  numbers  for  which  g(n)  =  g'(n)  is  not  true.  If  the  class  is 
not  void  it  has  a  positive  member  n0  which  precedes  all  other  members  in  the 
well  ordering  <C.  But  h(tio)  is  another  member  of  the  class,  for  otherwise  we 
should  have 


g{h(n0)')  =  g'(M«o)) 


and  therefore  g(«o)  =,sf(«o)>  i-e-  «o  would  not  be  in  the  class.  This  implies 

«o  “C  h(no)  contrary  to  r^h(no),  «o)  =  0.  The  class  is  therefore  void. 

It  should  be  noticed  that  we  do  not  really  need  to  make  use  of  the  fact  that  fl 
is  an  ordinal  formula.  It  suffices  that  SI  should  satisfy  conditions  (a)-(e) 
(p.  [162])  for  ordinal  formulae,  and  in  place  of  (/)  satisfy  (/'). 

(/')  There  is  no  formula  T  such  that  T(n)  is  convertible  to  a  formula  repre¬ 
senting  a  positive  integer  for  each  positive  integer  n,  and  such  that  il^T(n),  n^ 
conv  2,  for  each  positive  integer  n  for  which  fl(n,  n)  conv  3. 

The  problem  whether  a  formula  satisfies  conditions  (a)-(e),  (/')  is  number- 
theoretic.  If  we  use  formulae  satisfying  these  conditions  instead  of  ordinal 


202  I  Alan  Turing 


formulae  with  Ag2  or  Ag3,  we  have  a  non-constructive  logic  with  certain 
advantages  over  ordinal  logics.  The  intuitive  judgments  that  must  be  made  are 
all  judgments  of  the  truth  of  number-theoretic  theorems.  We  have  seen  in  §9  that 
the  connection  of  ordinal  logics  with  the  classical  theory  of  ordinals  is  quite 
superficial.  There  seem  to  be  good  reasons,  therefore,  for  giving  attention  to 
ordinal  formulae  in  this  modified  sense. 

The  ordinal  logic  Ag3  appears  to  be  adequate  for  most  purposes.  It  should,  for 
instance,  be  possible  to  carry  out  Gentzen’s  proof  of  consistency  of  number 
theory,  or  the  proof  of  the  uniqueness  of  the  normal  form  of  a  well-formed 
formula  (Church  and  Rosser  [1])  with  our  calculus  and  a  fairly  simple  set  of 
axioms.  How  far  this  is  the  case  can,  of  course,  only  be  determined  by  experi¬ 
ment. 

One  would  prefer  a  non-constructive  system  of  logic  based  on  transfinite 
induction  rather  simpler  than  the  system  which  we  have  described.  In  particular, 
it  would  seem  that  it  should  be  possible  to  eliminate  the  necessity  of  stating 
explicitly  the  validity  of  definitions  by  primitive  recursions,  since  this  principle 
itself  can  be  shown  to  be  valid  by  transfinite  induction.  It  is  possible  to  make 
such  modifications  in  the  system,  even  in  such  a  way  that  the  resulting  system  is 
still  complete,  but  no  real  advantage  is  gained  by  doing  so.  The  effect  is  always,  so 
far  as  I  know,  to  restrict  the  class  of  formulae  provable  with  a  given  set  of  axioms, 
so  that  we  obtain  no  theorems  but  trivial  restatements  of  the  axioms.  We  have 
therefore  to  compromise  between  simplicity  and  comprehensiveness. 


Index  of  definitions 

No  attempt  is  being  made  to  list  heavy  type  formulae  since  their  meanings  are 
not  always  constant  throughout  the  paper.  Abbreviations  for  definite  well- 
formed  formulae  are  listed  alphabetically. 


Page 


Ai . 179 

A1 . 169 

Bd . 169 

Ck . 173 

Cm . 199 

Comp . 180 

Dt . 151 

E . 176 

form . 150 

G . 177 

Gm . 192 


Page 

Gr . 150 

H . 165,  168 

Hi  . 168 

Hf. . 169 

Hg . 185 

1 . 148 

Inf . 169 

Jh . 183 

K . 177 

Lim . 169 

Ls . 168 


Page 

M . 

.  199 

MP . 

.  177 

Mg . 

.  184 

Nm . 

.  160 

Od . 

.  180 

P . 

.  169 

Prod . 

.  186 

Q . 

.  159 

Rec . 

.  198 

Rt . 

.  184 

S . 

.  149 

Systems  of  Logic  Based  on  Ordinals  I  203 


Sum . 

. 169 

X . 

. 158 

Ag3 . 

. 199 

Sq . 

. 185 

z . 

. 183 

Ah . 

. 178 

Tn . 

. 173 

A  p . 

. 177 

Ug . 

. 169 

r . 

. 160 

UT . 

. 151 

V. . 

. 160 

8 . 

. 147 

2 . 

. 198 

Vi . 

. 188 

© . 

. 188 

1,  2,  3, . 

. 148 

W . 

. 159 

Ag1  . 

. 194 

. 

.  15428 

W' . 

. 159 

Ag2 . 

. 199 

Bibliography 

Alonzo  Church,  [1],  “A  proof  of  freedom  from  contradiction”,  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  21 
(1935),  275-281. 

- [2],  Mathematical  logic ,  Lectures  at  Princeton  University  (1935-6),  mimeographed, 

113  pp. 

- [3],  “An  unsolvable  problem  of  elementary  number  theory”,  American  J.  of  Math.  58 

(1936),  345-363. 

- [4],  “The  constructive  second  number  class”.  Bull.  American  Math.  Soc.  44  (1938), 

224-238. 

G.  Gentzen,  [1],  “Die  Widerspruchsfreiheit  der  reinen  Zahlentheorie”  Math.  Annalen,  112 
(1936),  493-565. 

K.  Godel,  [1],  “Uber  formal  unentscheidbare  Satze  der  Principia  Mathematica  und 
verwandter  Systeme,  I”  Monatshefte  fur  Math,  und  Phys.  38  (1931),  173-189. 

- [2] .  On  undecidable  propositions  of  formal  mathematical  systems ,  Lectures  at  the 

Institute  for  Advanced  Study,  Princeton,  N.J.,  1934,  mimeographed,  30  pp. 

D.  Hilbert,  [1],  “Uber  das  Unendliche”,  Math.  Annalen,  95  (1926),  161-190. 

S.  C.  Kleene,  [1],  “A  theory  of  positive  integers  in  formal  logic”,  American  J.  of  Math.  57 
(1935),  153-173  and  219-244. 

- [2],  “General  recursive  functions  of  natural  numbers”.  Math.  Annalen,  112  (1935-6), 

727-742. 

- [3],  “\-definability  and  recursiveness”,  Duke  Math.  Jour.  2  (1936),  340-353. 

E.  L.  Post,  [1],  “Finite  combinatory  processes — formulation  1”,  Journal  Symbolic  Logic, 
1  (1936),  103-105. 

J.  B.  Rosser,  [1],  “Godel  theorems  for  non-constructive  logics”,  Journal  Symbolic  Logic,  2 
(1937),  129-137. 

A.  Tarski,  [1],  “Der  Wahrheitsbegriff  in  den  formalisierten  Sprachen”,  Studia  Philosophica, 
1  (1936),  261-405  (translation  from  the  original  paper  in  Polish  dated  1933). 

A.  M.  Turing,  [1],  “On  computable  numbers,  with  an  application  to  the  Entscheidungs- 
problem”.  [Chapter  1]. 

- [2],  “Computability  and  X.-definability”,  Journal  Symbolic  Logic,  2  (1937),  153-163. 


28  Editor’s  note.  The  remainder  of  Turing’s  index  has  been  incorporated  into  the  general  index  at  the  rear 
of  the  book. 


204  I  Alan  Turing 


E.  Zermelo,  [1],  “Grundlagen  einer  allgemeiner  Theorie  der  mathematischen  Satzsysteme, 
I”,  Fund.  Math.  25  (1935),  136-146. 

Alonzo  Church  and  S.  C.  Kleene,  [1],  “Formal  definitions  in  the  theory  of  ordinal 
numbers”,  Fund.  Math.  28  (1936),  11—21. 

Alonzo  Church  and  J.  B.  Rosser,  [1],  “Some  properties  of  conversion”,  Trans.  American 
Math.  Soc.  39  (1936),  472-482. 

D.  Hilbert  and  W.  Ackermann,  [1],  Grundzuge  der  theoretischen  Logik  (2nd  edition  revised, 
Berlin,  1938),  130  pp. 

A.  N.  Whitehead  and  Bertrand  Russell,  [1],  Principia  Mathematica  (2nd  edition,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  1925-1927),  3  vols. 


[Received  31  May,  1938. — Read  16  June,  1938.]