

Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines 
Be  Said  To  Think?  (1952) 

Alan  Turing,  Richard  Braithwaite, 
Geoffrey  Jefferson ,  Max  Newman 


Introduction 

Jack  Copeland 

This  discussion  between  Turing,  Newman,  R.  B.  Braithwaite,  and  G.  Jefferson  was 
recorded  by  the  BBC  on  10  January  1952  and  broadcast  on  BBC  Radio  on  the 
14th,  and  again  on  the  23rd,  of  that  month.  This  is  the  earliest  known  recorded 
discussion  of  artificial  intelligence.1 


The  Participants 

The  anchor  man  of  the  discussion  is  Richard  Braithwaite  (1900-90).  Braithwaite 
was  at  the  time  Sidgwick  Lecturer  in  Moral  Science  at  the  University  of  Cam¬ 
bridge,  where  the  following  year  he  was  appointed  Knightsbridge  Professor  of 
Moral  Philosophy.  Like  Turing,  he  was  a  Fellow  of  King’s  College.  Braithwaite’s 
main  work  lay  in  the  philosophy  of  science  and  in  decision  and  games  theory 
(which  he  applied  in  moral  philosophy). 

Geoffrey  Jefferson  (1886-1961)  retired  from  the  Chair  of  Neurosurgery  at 
Manchester  University  in  1951.  In  his  Lister  Oration,  delivered  at  the  Royal 


1  The  present  material  together  with  the  dialogues  recorded  in  Wittgenstein’s  Lectures  on  the  Foundations 
of  Mathematics  (ed.  C.  Diamond,  Ithaca,  NY:  Cornell  University  Press,  1976)  are  the  only  known  transcrip¬ 
tions  of  discussions  involving  Turing.  (Some  rather  compressed  notes  of  a  discussion  between  Turing, 
Newman,  Young,  Polanyi,  and  others,  entitled  ‘Rough  Draft  of  the  Discussion  on  the  Mind  and  the 
Computing  Machine,  held  on  Thursday,  27th  October,  1949,  in  the  Philosophy  Seminar’  (anon.,  n.d., 
University  of  Manchester  Philosophy  Department),  are  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing 
<www.AlanTuring.net/philosophy_seminar_octl949>.  I  am  grateful  to  Wolfe  Mays  for  making  these  notes 
available.) 


488  I  Jack  Copeland 


College  of  Surgeons  of  England  on  9  June  1949,  he  had  declared:  ‘When  we  hear 
it  said  that  wireless  valves  think,  we  may  despair  of  language.’2 

Turing  gave  a  substantial  discussion  of  Jefferson’s  views  in  ‘Computing  Ma¬ 
chinery  and  Intelligence’  (pp.  451-2),  rebutting  the  ‘argument  from  conscious¬ 
ness’  that  he  found  in  the  Lister  Oration.  In  the  present  chapter,  Jefferson  takes 
numerous  pot  shots  at  the  notion  of  a  machine  thinking,  which  for  the  most  part 
Turing  and  Newman  are  easily  able  to  turn  aside. 

Jefferson  may  have  thought  little  of  the  idea  of  machine  intelligence,  but  he 
held  Turing  in  considerable  regard,  saying  after  Turing’s  death  that  he  ‘had  real 
genius,  it  shone  from  him’.3 


The  Turing  Test  Revisited 

From  the  point  of  view  of  Turing  scholarship,  the  most  important  parts  of  ‘Can 
Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  to  Think’  are  the  passages  containing 
Turing’s  exposition  of  the  imitation  game  or  Turing  test.  The  description  of  the 
test  that  Turing  gave  in  ‘Computing  Machinery  and  Intelligence’  is  here  modified 
in  a  number  of  significant  ways. 

The  lone  interrogator  of  the  original  version  is  replaced  by  a  ‘jury’  (p.  495). 
Each  jury  must  judge  ‘quite  a  number  of  times’  and  ‘sometimes  they  really  are 
dealing  with  a  man  and  not  a  machine’.  For  a  machine  to  pass  the  test,  a 
‘considerable  proportion’  of  the  jury  ‘must  be  taken  in  by  the  pretence’.  The 
members  of  the  jury  interrogate  the  contestants,  but  their  contributions  ‘don’t 
really  have  to  be  questions,  any  more  than  questions  in  a  law  court  are  really 
questions’;  for  example,  ‘I  put  it  to  you  that  you  are  only  pretending  to  be  a  man’ 
is  ‘quite  in  order’. 

In  its  original  presentation  (Chapter  11),  the  Turing  test  is  a  three-party  game 
involving  the  parallel  interrogation  by  a  human  of  a  computer  and  a  human  foil. 
According  to  the  1952  formulation,  however,  members  of  a  jury  interview  a 
series  of  contestants  one  at  a  time,  some  of  the  contestants  being  machines  and 
some  humans.  In  the  original  form  of  the  test,  each  interrogator  knows  that  one 
of  each  pair  of  interviewees  is  a  human  and  one  a  machine,  but  in  the  single¬ 
interviewee  version  of  the  test,  this  condition  is  necessarily  absent.  It  appears  that 
the  earlier  formulation  is  in  fact  superior,  since  the  single-interviewee  version  is 
open  to  a  biasing  effect  which  disfavours  the  machine.  Results  of  the  Loebner 
series  of  single-interviewee  Turing  tests  reveal  a  strong  propensity  among  jurors 
to  classify  human  respondents  as  machines.  (New  York  businessman  Elugh 
Loebner  started  the  annual  Loebner  Prize  competition  in  1991,  offering  the 


2  G.  Jefferson,  ‘The  Mind  of  Mechanical  Man’,  British  Medical  Journal,  25  June  1949,  1105-10  (1110). 

3  Letter  from  Jefferson  to  Sara  Turing,  18  Oct.  1954.  The  letter  is  among  the  Turing  Papers  in  the  Modern 
Archive  Centre,  King’s  College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  A  16). 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  489 

sum  of  $100,000  to  the  programmer(s)  of  the  first  programme  to  pass  the  Turing 
test.  $2,000  is  awarded  each  year  for  the  best  effort.  So  far  the  grand  prize 
remains  unclaimed.)  In  the  Loebner  competition  held  at  Dartmouth  College, 
New  Hampshire,  in  January  2000,  human  respondents  were  mistaken  for  com¬ 
puters  on  ten  occasions,  a  computer  for  a  human  on  none.  The  same  effect  was 
present  in  a  series  of  single-interviewee  tests  performed  with  Kenneth  Colby’s 
historic  programme  Parry.4  In  a  total  of  ten  interviews,  there  were  five  misiden- 
tifications;  in  four  of  these  a  human  respondent  was  mistaken  for  a  computer. 
Presumably  this  phenomenon  is  the  result  of  a  determination  on  the  part  of  the 
jurors  not  to  be  fooled  by  a  programme.  This  lengthening  of  the  odds  against  the 
machine  cannot  occur  in  the  three-player  form  of  the  test. 


Turing’s  Predictions 

Turing  is  often  misquoted  as  having  predicted  that,  by  the  turn  of  the  twentieth 
century,  artificial  intelligence  indistinguishable  from  human  intelligence  would 
be  in  existence.  What  he  in  fact  wrote  in  1950  was  that  (p.  449): 

in  about  fifty  years’  time  it  will  be  possible  to  programme  computers ...  to  make  them 
play  the  imitation  game  so  well  that  an  average  interrogator  will  not  have  more  than  70 
per  cent  chance  of  making  the  right  identification  after  five  minutes  of  questioning. 

Some  commentators  have  reported  this  prediction  the  wrong  way  about,  as  the 
claim  that,  by  the  end  of  the  twentieth  century,  computers  would  succeed  in 
deceiving  the  interrogator  70  per  cent  of  the  time.5 

In  ‘Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  to  Think’,  Turing  offered  a 
prediction  that  is  interestingly  different  from  the  above,  and  which  seems  to 
concern  success  of  a  more  substantial  nature  (p.  495): 

Newmam  I  should  like  to  be  there  when  your  match  between  a  man  and  a  machine  takes 
place,  and  perhaps  to  try  my  hand  at  making  up  some  of  the  questions.  But  that  will  be 
a  long  time  from  now,  if  the  machine  is  to  stand  any  chance  with  no  questions  barred? 
Turing-.  Oh  yes,  at  least  100  years,  I  should  say. 

In  Chapter  11,  Turing  describes  a  form  of  the  imitation  game  in  which  the 
interrogator  must  attempt  to  distinguish  between  a  woman  (the  foil)  and  a  man 
pretending  to  be  a  woman.  This  form  of  the  game  serves  as  a  reference  point  for 
evaluating  the  computer’s  performance  in  the  computer-human  imitation  game 
(p.  441): 


4  J.  F.  Heiser,  K.  M.  Colby,  W.  S.  Faught  and  R.  C.  Parkison,  ‘Can  Psychiatrists  Distinguish  a  Computer 
Simulation  of  Paranoia  from  the  Real  Thing?’,  Journal  of  Psychiatric  Research,  15  (1980),  149-62. 

5  See,  for  example,  R.  Brooks,  ‘Intelligence  without  Reason’,  in  L.  Steels  and  R.  Brooks  (eds.),  The 
Artificial  Life  Route  to  Artificial  Intelligence  (Mahwah,  NJ:  Erlbaum,  1995),  n.  8,  and  P.  Millican  and  A.  Clark 
(eds.),  Machines  and  Thought:  The  Legacy  of  Alan  Turing  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1996),  61. 


490  I  Jack  Copeland 


We  now  ask  the  question,  ‘What  will  happen  when  a  machine  takes  the  part  of  A  in  this 
[man-imitates-woman]  game?’  Will  the  interrogator  decide  wrongly  as  often  when  the 
game  is  played  like  this  as  he  does  when  the  game  is  played  between  a  man  and  a  woman? 

Reformulating  Turing’s  1952  prediction  in  these  terms  produces:  It  will  be  at 
least  100  years  (2052)  before  a  computer  is  able  to  play  the  imitation  game 
sufficiently  well  so  that  jurors  will  decide  wrongly  as  often  in  man-imitates- 
woman  imitation  games  as  in  computer-imitates-human  imitation  games,  in 
each  case  no  questions  being  barred. 


‘Fiendish  Expert’  Objections  to  the  Turing  Test 

‘Fiendish  expert’  objections,  of  which  there  are  many,  are  of  the  form:  ‘An  expert 
could  unmask  the  computer  by  asking  it . . .  All  can  be  dealt  with  in  a  similar 
fashion.  (Some  other  objections  to  the  test  are  discussed  in  the  introduction  to 
Chapter  11.) 

An  interesting  example  is  put  forward  by  Robert  French.6  French’s  objection 
involves  the  phenomenon  of  associative  priming,  observed  in  what  psychologists 
call  the  word/ non- word  recognition  task.  A  subject  seated  in  front  of  a  screen  is 
presented  for  a  brief  time  with  what  may  or  may  not  be  a  word  (e.g.  ‘dog’, 
‘dok’).  If  the  subject  recognizes  the  letters  as  a  word  he  or  she  must  press  a 
button.  The  experimenter  measures  the  time  that  the  subject  takes  to  respond.  It 
is  found  that,  on  average,  subjects  require  less  time  to  recognize  a  word  if  the 
word  is  preceded  by  a  brief  presentation  of  an  associated  word  (e.g.  ‘fish’  may 
facilitate  the  recognition  of ‘chips’,  ‘bread’  of ‘butter’).  French’s  claim  is  that  this 
priming  effect  may  be  used  to  unmask  the  computer  in  the  Turing  test: 

The  Turing  Test  interrogator  makes  use  of  this  phenomenon  as  follows.  The  day  before  the 
Test,  she  selects  a  set  of  words  (and  non- words),  runs  the  lexical  decision  task  on  the 
interviewees  and  records  average  recognition  times.  She  then  comes  to  the  Test  armed 
with  the  results . . .  [and]  identifies  as  the  human  being  the  candidate  whose  results  more 
closely  resemble  the  average  results  produced  by  her  sample  population  of  interviewees. 
The  machine  would  invariably  fail  this  type  of  test  because  there  is  no  a  priori  way  of 
determining  associative  strengths . . .  Virtually  the  only  way  a  machine  could  determine, 
even  on  average,  all  of  the  associative  strengths  between  human  concepts  is  to  have 
experienced  the  world  as  the  human  candidate  and  the  interviewers  had.7 

Turing,  however,  was  happy  to  rule  out  expert  jurors.  In  ‘Can  Automatic 
Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  to  Think’  he  said  that  the  interrogator  ‘should 
not  be  expert  about  machines’  (p.  495),  and  in  chapter  10,  describing  the  chess¬ 
player  version  of  the  test,  he  said  that  the  discriminator  should  be  a  ‘rather  poor’ 
chess  player  (p.  431).  Turing  did  not  mention  other  kinds  of  expert,  but  the 

6  R.  French,  ‘Subcognition  and  the  Limits  of  the  Turing  Test’,  Mind,  99  (1990),  53-65. 

7  Ibid.  17. 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  491 

reasons  for  excluding  experts  about  machines  apply  equally  well  to  experts  about 
minds. 

In  any  case,  French’s  proposal  is  illegitimate.  The  specifications  of  the  Turing 
test  are  clear:  the  interrogator  is  allowed  only  to  put  questions.  There  is  no 
provision  for  the  use  of  the  equipment  necessary  for  administering  the  lexical 
decision  task  and  for  measuring  the  contestants’  reaction  times.  One  might  as 
well  allow  the  interrogator  to  bring  along  equipment  for  measuring  the  contest¬ 
ants’  magnetic  fields  or  energy  dissipation.8 


Can  Machines  Think? 

In  Chapter  11,  Turing  said  that  the  question  ‘Can  machines  think?’  is  ‘too 
meaningless  to  deserve  discussion’  (p.  449).  He  certainly  did  not  allow  this 
view  to  prevent  him  from  indulging  rather  often  in  such  discussion.  In  the 
present  chapter,  Turing  records  a  considerably  milder  attitude  to  the  question 
(p.  495): 

You  might  call  it  a  test  to  see  whether  the  machine  thinks,  but  it  would  be  better  to  avoid 
begging  the  question,  and  say  that  the  machines  that  pass  are  (let’s  say)  ‘Grade  A’ 
machines.  . . .  [The  question  whether]  machines  really  could  pass  the  test  [is]  not  the 
same  as  ‘Do  machines  think?’,  but  it  seems  near  enough  for  our  present  purpose,  and 
raises  much  the  same  difficulties. 

In  Chapter  10  Turing  wrote  (p.  431): 

The  extent  to  which  we  regard  something  as  behaving  in  an  intelligent  manner  is 
determined  as  much  by  our  own  state  of  mind  and  training  as  by  the  properties  of  the 
object  under  consideration.  If  we  are  able  to  explain  or  predict  its  behaviour ...  we  have 
little  temptation  to  imagine  intelligence.  With  the  same  object  therefore  it  is  possible  that 
one  man  would  consider  it  as  intelligent  and  another  would  not;  the  second  man  would 
have  found  out  the  rules  of  its  behaviour. 

Turing  develops  this  point  in  the  present  discussion  (p.  500): 

As  soon  as  one  can  see  the  cause  and  effect  working  themselves  out  in  the  brain,  one 
regards  it  as  not  being  thinking,  but  a  sort  of  unimaginative  donkey-work.  From  this  point 
of  view  one  might  be  tempted  to  define  thinking  as  consisting  of  ‘those  mental  processes 
that  we  don’t  understand’.  If  this  is  right  then  to  make  a  thinking  machine  is  to  make  one 
which  does  interesting  things  without  our  really  understanding  quite  how  it  is  done. 

Many  years  later  Marvin  Minsky  put  forward  this  same  view,  saying  that 
‘intelligence’  is  simply  our  name  for  whichever  problem-solving  mental  processes 


8  There  is  additional  discussion  of  French’s  objections  to  the  Turing  test  in  my  ‘The  Turing  Test’,  Minds 
and  Machines ,  10  (2000),  519-39  (reprinted  in  J.  H.  Moor  (ed.),  The  Turing  Test  (Dordrecht:  Kluwer,  2003)). 


492  I  Jack  Copeland 

we  do  not  yet  understand.9  Minsky  likens  intelligence  to  the  concept  ‘unexplored 
regions  of  Africa’:  it  disappears  as  soon  as  we  discover  it. 


Analogy  and  Creativity 

Turing  sketches  an  interesting  mechanical  explanation  of  how  analogy  works  in 
the  human  brain,  and  suggests  that  a  digital  computer  can  be  made  to  do  the 
same  (p.  499).  Another  proposal  which  does  not  appear  elsewhere  in  Turing’s 
writings  concerns  the  vexed  issue  of  creativity.  A  machine  that  combines  words 
more  or  less  at  random  and  then  scores  the  combinations  ‘for  various  merits’ 
would,  he  says,  be  able  to  find  useful  new  concepts.  His  example  is  ‘lumping 
together  rain,  hail,  snow  and  sleet,  under  the  word  “precipitation”’  (p.  499).  He 
agrees  with  Newman  that  this  process  would  be  ‘shockingly  slow’.  Nevertheless, 
this  brief  suggestion  of  Turing’s  is  an  economical  illustration  of  the  possibility  of 
a  machine’s  acquiring  new  concepts  for  itself. 


Machine  Learning 

‘Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  to  Think’  contains  a  lengthy 
discussion  of  machine  learning,  in  which  Turing  alludes  to  the  P-type  machines 
of  Chapter  10  (pp.  425-9).  He  says  in  response  to  Jefferson’s  point  that  real 
learning  involves  intervention  by  teachers,  ‘I  have  made  some  experiments  in 
teaching  a  machine  to  do  some  simple  operation,  and  a  very  great  deal  of  such 
intervention  was  needed’  (p.  497).  Turing  emphasizes  several  times  that  a 
learning  machine,  if  it  is  to  be  effective,  must  not  only  learn  first-order  facts 
but  must  also  be  able  to  learn  to  improve  its  learning  methods  (compare  the 
discussion  of  the  Mathematical  Objection  in  Chapter  12  and  elsewhere). 

Newman  gives  a  simple  illustration  (on  p.  496)  of  how  a  computer  can  learn  to 
do  better  with  practice.  His  example  makes  use  of  the  idea  of  the  computer 
modifying  its  own  programme,  mentioned  by  Turing  in  Chapter  9  (p.  393). 
Faced  with  a  two-move  chess  problem,  the  machine  initially  follows  an  instruc¬ 
tion  to  choose  a  move  at  random.  If  the  move,  say  B-Q5,  is  found  to  lead  to 
forced  mate  in  two  moves,  then  the  machine  changes  the  instruction  to  ‘Try  B- 
Q5’.  When  presented  with  the  same  problem  again,  the  machine  immediately 
gives  the  right  answer. 


Newman’s  Test 

Towards  the  end  of  the  discussion  Newman  suggested  a  test — and  the  term 
‘Newman’s  test’  seems  appropriate — for  when  machines  have  ‘begun  to  think’ 


9  M.  Minsky,  The  Society  of  Mind  (London:  Pan  Books,  1988),  71. 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  493 


(pp.  504-5).  That  stage  of  development  has  been  reached,  he  said,  when  a 
machine  can  solve  a  mathematical  problem  for  which  no  effective  method  exists. 


Provenance 

The  discussion  is  taken  from  a  BBC  script  (which  is  marked  ‘Not  checked  in 
Talks  Department  with  “as  broadcast”  script’).10 


10  The  script  is  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  B  6).  It 
was  first  published  in  B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.),  ‘A  Lecture  and  Two  Radio  Broadcasts  on  Machine  Intelligence  by 
Alan  Turing’,  in  K.  Furukawa,  D.  Michie,  and  S.  Muggleton  (eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  15  (Oxford:  Oxford 
University  Press,  1999). 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines 
Be  Said  To  Think? 

Braithwaite:  We’re  here  today  to  discuss  whether  calculating  machines  can  be 
said  to  think  in  any  proper  sense  of  the  word.  Thinking  is  ordinarily  regarded 
as  so  much  a  speciality  of  man,  and  perhaps  of  other  higher  animals,  that  the 
question  may  seem  too  absurd  to  be  discussed.  But,  of  course,  it  all  depends 
on  what  is  to  be  included  in  thinking.  The  word  is  used  to  cover  a  multitude  of 
different  activities.  What  would  you,  Jefferson,  as  a  physiologist,  say  were  the 
most  important  elements  involved  in  thinking? 

Jefferson:  I  don’t  think  that  we  need  waste  too  much  time  on  [a]  definition  of 
thinking  since  it  will  be  hard  to  get  beyond  phrases  in  common  usage,  such  as 
having  ideas  in  the  mind,  cogitating,  meditating,  deliberating,  solving  prob¬ 
lems  or  imagining.  Philologists  say  that  the  word  ‘Man’  is  derived  from  a 
Sanskrit  word  that  means  ‘to  think’,  probably  in  the  sense  of  judging  between 
one  idea  and  another.  I  agree  that  we  could  no  longer  use  the  word  ‘thinking’ 
in  a  sense  that  restricted  it  to  man.  No  one  would  deny  that  many  animals 
think,  though  in  a  very  limited  way.  They  lack  insight.  For  example,  a  dog 
learns  that  it  is  wrong  to  get  on  cushions  or  chairs  with  muddy  paws,  but  he 
only  learns  it  as  a  venture  that  doesn’t  pay.  He  has  no  conception  of  the  real 
reason,  that  he  damages  fabrics  by  doing  that. 

The  average  person  would  perhaps  be  content  to  define  thinking  in  very 
general  terms  such  as  revolving  ideas  in  the  mind,  of  having  notions  in  one’s 
head,  of  having  one’s  mind  occupied  by  a  problem,  and  so  on.  But  it  is  only 
right  to  add  that  our  minds  are  occupied  much  of  the  time  with  trivialities. 
One  might  say  in  the  end  that  thinking  was  the  general  result  of  having  a 
sufficiently  complex  nervous  system.  Very  simple  ones  do  not  provide  the 
creature  with  any  problems  that  are  not  answered  by  simple  reflex  mechan¬ 
isms.  Thinking  then  becomes  all  the  things  that  go  on  in  one’s  brain,  things 
that  often  end  in  an  action  but  don’t  necessarily  do  so.  I  should  say  that  it  was 
the  sum  total  of  what  the  brain  of  man  or  animal  does.  Turing,  what  do  you 
think  about  it?  Have  you  a  mechanical  definition? 

Turing:  I  don’t  want  to  give  a  definition  of  thinking,  but  if  I  had  to  I  should 
probably  be  unable  to  say  anything  more  about  it  than  that  it  was  a  sort  of 
buzzing  that  went  on  inside  my  head.  But  I  don’t  really  see  that  we  need  to 
agree  on  a  definition  at  all.  The  important  thing  is  to  try  to  draw  a  line 
between  the  properties  of  a  brain,  or  of  a  man,  that  we  want  to  discuss,  and 
those  that  we  don’t.  To  take  an  extreme  case,  we  are  not  interested  in  the  fact 


Printed  with  the  permission  of  the  BBC,  Lewis  C.  Braithwaite,  Antony  A.  Jefferson,  Edward  Newman,  and 
the  Estate  of  Alan  Turing. 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  495 

that  the  brain  has  the  consistency  of  cold  porridge.  We  don’t  want  to  say 
‘This  machine’s  quite  hard,  so  it  isn’t  a  brain,  and  so  it  can’t  think.’  I  would  like 
to  suggest  a  particular  kind  of  test  that  one  might  apply  to  a  machine.  You 
might  call  it  a  test  to  see  whether  the  machine  thinks,  but  it  would  be  better  to 
avoid  begging  the  question,  and  say  that  the  machines  that  pass  are  (let’s  say) 
‘Grade  A’  machines.  The  idea  of  the  test  is  that  the  machine  has  to  try  and 
pretend  to  be  a  man,  by  answering  questions  put  to  it,  and  it  will  only  pass  if 
the  pretence  is  reasonably  convincing.  A  considerable  proportion  of  a  jury, 
who  should  not  be  expert  about  machines,  must  be  taken  in  by  the  pretence. 
They  aren’t  allowed  to  see  the  machine  itself — that  would  make  it  too  easy.  So 
the  machine  is  kept  in  a  far  away  room  and  the  jury  are  allowed  to  ask  it 
questions,  which  are  transmitted  through  to  it:  it  sends  back  a  typewritten 
answer. 

Braithwaite :  Would  the  questions  have  to  be  sums,  or  could  I  ask  it  what  it  had 
had  for  breakfast? 

Turing:  Oh  yes,  anything.  And  the  questions  don’t  really  have  to  be  questions, 
any  more  than  questions  in  a  law  court  are  really  questions.  You  know  the  sort 
of  thing.  ‘I  put  it  to  you  that  you  are  only  pretending  to  be  a  man’  would  be 
quite  in  order.  Likewise  the  machine  would  be  permitted  all  sorts  of  tricks  so 
as  to  appear  more  man-like,  such  as  waiting  a  bit  before  giving  the  answer,  or 
making  spelling  mistakes,  but  it  can’t  make  smudges  on  the  paper,  any  more 
than  one  can  send  smudges  by  telegraph.  We  had  better  suppose  that  each  jury 
has  to  judge  quite  a  number  of  times,  and  that  sometimes  they  really  are 
dealing  with  a  man  and  not  a  machine.  That  will  prevent  them  saying  ‘It  must 
be  a  machine’  every  time  without  proper  consideration. 

Well,  that’s  my  test.  Of  course  I  am  not  saying  at  present  either  that 
machines  really  could  pass  the  test,  or  that  they  couldn’t.  My  suggestion  is 
just  that  this  is  the  question  we  should  discuss.  It’s  not  the  same  as  ‘Do 
machines  think,’  but  it  seems  near  enough  for  our  present  purpose,  and  raises 
much  the  same  difficulties. 

Newman:  I  should  like  to  be  there  when  your  match  between  a  man  and  a 
machine  takes  place,  and  perhaps  to  try  my  hand  at  making  up  some  of  the 
questions.  But  that  will  be  a  long  time  from  now,  if  the  machine  is  to  stand  any 
chance  with  no  questions  barred? 

Turing:  Oh  yes,  at  least  100  years,  I  should  say. 

Jefferson:  Newman,  how  well  would  existing  machines  stand  up  to  this  test?  What 
kind  of  things  can  they  do  now? 

Newman:  Of  course,  their  strongest  line  is  mathematical  computing,  which  they 
were  designed  to  do,  but  they  would  also  do  well  at  some  questions  that  don’t 
look  numerical,  but  can  easily  be  made  so,  like  solving  a  chess  problem  or 
looking  you  up  a  train  in  the  time-table. 

Braithwaite:  Could  they  do  that? 


496  I  Turing,  Braithwaite,  Jefferson,  Newman 

Newman :  Yes.  Both  these  jobs  can  be  done  by  trying  all  the  possibilities,  one  after 
another.  The  whole  of  the  information  in  an  ordinary  time-table  would  have 
to  be  written  in  as  part  of  the  programme,  and  the  simplest  possible  routine 
would  be  one  that  found  the  trains  from  London  to  Manchester  by  testing 
every  train  in  the  time-table  to  see  if  it  calls  at  both  places,  and  printing  out 
those  that  do.  Of  course,  this  is  a  dull,  plodding  method,  and  you  could 
improve  on  it  by  using  a  more  complicated  routine,  but  if  I  have  understood 
Turing’s  test  properly,  you  are  not  allowed  to  go  behind  the  scenes  and  criticise 
the  method,  but  must  abide  by  the  scoring  on  correct  answers,  found  reason¬ 
ably  quickly. 

Jefferson:  Yes,  but  all  the  same  a  man  who  has  to  look  up  trains  frequently  gets 
better  at  it,  as  he  learns  his  way  about  the  time-table.  Suppose  I  give  a  machine 
the  same  problem  again,  can  it  learn  to  do  better  without  going  through  the 
whole  rigmarole  of  trying  everything  over  every  time?  I’d  like  to  have  your 
answer  to  that  because  it’s  such  an  important  point.  Can  machines  learn  to  do 
better  with  practice? 

Newman :  Yes,  it  could.  Perhaps  the  chess  problem  provides  a  better  illustration  of 
this.  First  I  should  mention  that  all  the  information  required  in  any  job — the 
numbers,  times  of  trains,  positions  of  pieces,  or  whatever  it  is,  and  also  the 
instructions  saying  what  is  to  be  done  with  them — all  this  material  is  stored  in 
the  same  way.  (In  the  Manchester  machine  it  is  stored  as  a  pattern  on  something 
resembling  a  television  screen.)  As  the  work  goes  on  the  pattern  is  changed. 
Usually  it  is  the  part  of  the  pattern  that  contains  the  data  that  changes,  while  the 
instructions  stay  fixed.  But  it  is  just  as  simple  to  arrange  that  the  instructions 
themselves  shall  be  changed  now  and  then.  Well,  now  a  programme  could  be 
composed  that  would  cause  the  machine  to  do  this:  a  2-move  chess  problem  is 
recorded  into  the  machine  in  some  suitable  coding,  and  whenever  the  machine 
is  started,  a  white  move  is  chosen  at  random  (there  is  a  device  for  making 
random  choices  in  our  machine).  All  the  consequences  of  this  move  are  now 
analysed,  and  if  it  does  not  lead  to  forced  mate  in  two  moves,  the  machine 
prints,  say,  ‘P-Q3,  wrong  move’,  and  stops.  But  the  analysis  shows  that  when  the 
right  move  is  chosen  the  machine  not  only  prints,  say,  ‘B-Q5,  solution’,  but  it 
changes  the  instruction  calling  for  a  random  choice  to  one  that  says  ‘Try  B-Q5.’ 
The  result  is  that  whenever  the  machine  is  started  again  it  will  immediately  print 
out  the  right  solution — and  this  without  the  man  who  made  up  the  routine 
knowing  beforehand  what  it  was.  Such  a  routine  could  certainly  be  made  now, 
and  I  think  this  can  fairly  be  called  learning. 

Jefferson:  Yes,  I  suppose  it  is.  Human  beings  learn  by  repeating  the  same  exercises 
until  they  have  perfected  them.  Of  course  it  goes  further,  and  at  the  same  time 
— we  learn  generally  to  shift  the  knowledge  gained  about  one  thing  to  another 
set  of  problems,  seeing  relevances  and  relationships.  Learning  means  remem¬ 
bering.  How  long  can  a  machine  store  information  for? 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  497 


Newman:  Oh,  at  least  as  long  as  a  man’s  lifetime,  if  it  is  refreshed  occasionally. 

Jefferson:  Another  difference  would  be  that  in  the  learning  process  there  is  much 
more  frequent  intervention  by  teachers,  parental  or  otherwise,  guiding  the  arts 
of  learning.  You  mathematicians  put  the  programme  once  into  the  machine 
and  leave  it  to  it.  You  wouldn’t  get  any  distance  at  all  with  human  beings  if  that 
is  what  you  did.  In  fact,  the  only  time  you  do  that  in  the  learning  period  is  at 
examinations. 

Turing:  It’s  quite  true  that  when  a  child  is  being  taught,  his  parents  and  teachers 
are  repeatedly  intervening  to  stop  him  doing  this  or  encourage  him  to  do  that. 
But  this  will  not  be  any  the  less  so  when  one  is  trying  to  teach  a  machine.  I  have 
made  some  experiments  in  teaching  a  machine  to  do  some  simple  operation, 
and  a  very  great  deal  of  such  intervention  was  needed  before  I  could  get  any 
results  at  all.  In  other  words  the  machine  learnt  so  slowly  that  it  needed  a  great 
deal  of  teaching. 

Jefferson:  But  who  was  learning,  you  or  the  machine? 

Turing:  Well,  I  suppose  we  both  were.  One  will  have  to  find  out  how  to  make 
machines  that  will  learn  more  quickly  if  there  is  to  be  any  real  success.  One 
hopes  too  that  there  will  be  a  sort  of  snowball  effect.  The  more  things  the 
machine  has  learnt  the  easier  it  ought  to  be  for  it  to  learn  others.  In  learning  to 
do  any  particular  thing  it  will  probably  also  be  learning  to  learn  more 
efficiently.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  when  one  has  taught  it  to  do  certain 
things  one  will  find  that  some  other  things  which  one  had  planned  to  teach  it 
are  happening  without  any  special  teaching  being  required.  This  certainly 
happens  with  an  intelligent  human  mind,  and  if  it  doesn’t  happen  when  one 
is  teaching  a  machine  there  is  something  lacking  in  the  machine.  What  do  you 
think  about  learning  possibilities,  Braithwaite? 

Braithwaite:  No-one  has  mentioned  what  seems  to  me  the  great  difficulty  about 
learning,  since  we’ve  only  discussed  learning  to  solve  a  particular  problem.  But 
the  most  important  part  of  human  learning  is  learning  from  experience — not 
learning  from  one  particular  kind  of  experience,  but  being  able  to  learn  from 
experience  in  general.  A  machine  can  easily  be  constructed  with  a  feed-back 
device  so  that  the  programming  of  the  machine  is  controlled  by  the  relation  of 
its  output  to  some  feature  in  its  external  environment — so  that  the  working  of 
the  machine  in  relation  to  the  environment  is  self-corrective.  But  this  requires 
that  it  should  be  some  particular  feature  of  the  environment  to  which  the 
machine  has  to  adjust  itself.  The  peculiarity  of  men  and  animals  is  that  they 
have  the  power  of  adjusting  themselves  to  almost  all  the  features.  The  feature 
to  which  adjustment  is  made  on  a  particular  occasion  is  the  one  the  man  is 
attending  to  and  he  attends  to  what  he  is  interested  in.  His  interests  are 
determined,  by  and  large,  by  his  appetites,  desires,  drives,  instincts — all  the 
things  that  together  make  up  his  ‘springs  of  action’.  If  we  want  to  construct  a 
machine  which  will  vary  its  attention  to  things  in  its  environment  so  that  it 


498  I  Turing,  Braithwaite,  Jefferson,  Newman 

will  sometimes  adjust  itself  to  one  and  sometimes  to  another,  it  would  seem  to 
be  necessary  to  equip  the  machine  with  something  corresponding  to  a  set  of 
appetites.  If  the  machine  is  built  to  be  treated  only  as  a  domestic  pet,  and  is 
spoon-fed  with  particular  problems,  it  will  not  be  able  to  learn  in  the  varying 
way  in  which  human  beings  learn.  This  arises  from  the  necessity  of  adapting 
behaviour  suitably  to  environment  if  human  appetites  are  to  be  satisfied. 

Jefferson:  Turing,  you  spoke  with  great  confidence  about  what  you  are  going  to  be 
able  to  do.  You  make  it  sound  as  if  it  would  be  fairly  easy  to  modify 
construction  so  that  the  machine  reacted  more  like  a  man.  But  I  recollect 
that  from  the  time  of  Descartes  and  Borelli  on  people  have  said  that  it  would 
be  only  a  matter  of  a  few  years,  perhaps  3  or  4  or  maybe  50,  and  a  replica  of 
man  would  have  been  artificially  created.  We  shall  be  wrong,  I  am  sure,  if  we 
give  the  impression  that  these  things  would  be  easy  to  do. 

Newman :  I  agree  that  we  are  getting  rather  far  away  from  computing  machines  as 
they  exist  at  present.  These  machines  have  rather  restricted  appetites,  and  they 
can’t  blush  when  they’re  embarrassed,  but  it’s  quite  hard  enough,  and  I  think  a 
very  interesting  problem,  to  discover  how  near  these  actually  existing  ma¬ 
chines  can  get  to  thinking.  Even  if  we  stick  to  the  reasoning  side  of  thinking,  it 
is  a  long  way  from  solving  chess  problems  to  the  invention  of  new  mathemat¬ 
ical  concepts  or  making  a  generalisation  that  takes  in  ideas  that  were  current 
before,  but  had  never  been  brought  together  as  instances  of  a  single  general 
notion. 

Braithwaite:  For  example? 

Newman:  The  different  kinds  of  number.  There  are  the  integers,  0,  1,  —2,  and  so 
on;  there  are  the  real  numbers  used  in  comparing  lengths,  for  example  the 
circumference  of  a  circle  and  its  diameter;  and  the  complex  numbers  involving 
V—l;  and  so  on.  It  is  not  at  all  obvious  that  these  are  instances  of  one  thing, 
‘number’.  The  Greek  mathematicians  used  entirely  different  words  for  the 
integers  and  the  real  numbers,  and  had  no  single  idea  to  cover  both.  It  is 
really  only  recently  that  the  general  notion  of  kinds  of  number  has  been 
abstracted  from  these  instances  and  accurately  defined.  To  make  this  sort  of 
generalisation  you  need  to  have  the  power  of  recognising  similarities,  seeing 
analogies  between  things  that  had  not  been  put  together  before.  It  is  not  just  a 
matter  of  testing  things  for  a  specified  property  and  classifying  them  accord¬ 
ingly.  The  concept  itself  has  to  be  framed,  something  has  to  be  created,  say  the 
idea  of  a  number-field.  Can  we  even  guess  at  the  way  a  machine  could  make 
such  an  invention  from  a  programme  composed  by  a  man  who  had  not  the 
concept  in  his  own  mind? 

Turing:  It  seems  to  me,  Newman,  that  what  you  said  about  ‘trying  out  possibil¬ 
ities’  as  a  method  applies  to  quite  an  extent,  even  when  a  machine  is  required 
to  do  something  as  advanced  as  finding  a  useful  new  concept.  I  wouldn’t  like 
to  have  to  define  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘concept’,  nor  to  give  rules  for  rating 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  499 


their  usefulness,  but  whatever  they  are  they’ve  got  outward  and  visible  forms, 
which  are  words  and  combinations  of  words.  A  machine  could  make  up  such 
combinations  of  words  more  or  less  at  random,  and  then  give  them  marks  for 
various  merits. 

Newman:  Wouldn’t  that  take  a  prohibitively  long  time? 

Turing:  It  would  certainly  be  shockingly  slow,  but  it  could  start  on  easy  things, 
such  as  lumping  together  rain,  hail,  snow  and  sleet,  under  the  word  ‘precipi¬ 
tation.’  Perhaps  it  might  do  more  difficult  things  later  on  if  it  was  learning  all 
the  time  how  to  improve  its  methods. 

Braithwaite:  I  don’t  think  there’s  much  difficulty  about  seeing  analogies  that  can 
be  formally  analysed  and  explicitly  stated.  It  is  then  only  a  question  of 
designing  the  machine  so  that  it  can  recognise  similarities  of  mathematical 
structure.  The  difficulty  arises  if  the  analogy  is  a  vague  one  about  which  little 
more  can  be  said  than  that  one  has  a  feeling  that  there  is  some  sort  of 
similarity  between  two  cases  but  one  hasn’t  any  idea  as  to  the  respect  in 
which  the  two  cases  are  similar.  A  machine  can’t  recognise  similarities  when 
there  is  nothing  in  its  programme  to  say  what  are  the  similarities  it  is  expected 
to  recognise. 

Turing:  I  think  you  could  make  a  machine  spot  an  analogy,  in  fact  it’s  quite  a 
good  instance  of  how  a  machine  could  be  made  to  do  some  of  those  things 
that  one  usually  regards  as  essentially  a  human  monopoly.  Suppose  that 
someone  was  trying  to  explain  the  double  negative  to  me,  for  instance,  that 
when  something  isn’t  not  green  it  must  be  green,  and  he  couldn’t  quite  get  it 
across.  He  might  say  ‘Well,  it’s  like  crossing  the  road.  You  cross  it,  and  then 
you  cross  it  again,  and  you’re  back  where  you  started.’  This  remark  might  just 
clinch  it.  This  is  one  of  the  things  one  would  like  to  work  with  machines,  and  I 
think  it  would  be  likely  to  happen  with  them.  I  imagine  that  the  way  analogy 
works  in  our  brains  is  something  like  this.  When  two  or  more  sets  of  ideas 
have  the  same  pattern  of  logical  connections,  the  brain  may  very  likely 
economise  parts  by  using  some  of  them  twice  over,  to  remember  the  logical 
connections  both  in  the  one  case  and  in  the  other.  One  must  suppose  that 
some  part  of  my  brain  was  used  twice  over  in  this  way,  once  for  the  idea  of 
double  negation  and  once  for  crossing  the  road,  there  and  back.  I  am  really 
supposed  to  know  about  both  these  things  but  can’t  get  what  it  is  the  man  is 
driving  at,  so  long  as  he  is  talking  about  all  those  dreary  nots  and  not-nots. 
Somehow  it  doesn’t  get  through  to  the  right  part  of  the  brain.  But  as  soon  as 
he  says  his  piece  about  crossing  the  road  it  gets  through  to  the  right  part,  but 
by  a  different  route.  If  there  is  some  such  purely  mechanical  explanation  of 
how  this  argument  by  analogy  goes  on  in  the  brain,  one  could  make  a  digital 
computer  do  the  same. 

Jefferson:  Well,  there  isn’t  a  mechanical  explanation  in  terms  of  cells  and  con¬ 
necting  fibres  in  the  brain. 


500  I  Turing,  Braithwaite,  Jefferson,  Newman 


Braithwaite:  But  could  a  machine  really  do  this?  How  would  it  do  it? 

Turing :  I’ve  certainly  left  a  great  deal  to  the  imagination.  If  I  had  given  a  longer 
explanation  I  might  have  made  it  seem  more  certain  that  what  I  was  describing 
was  feasible,  but  you  would  probably  feel  rather  uneasy  about  it  all,  and  you’d 
probably  exclaim  impatiently,  ‘Well,  yes,  I  see  that  a  machine  could  do  all  that, 
but  I  wouldn’t  call  it  thinking.’  As  soon  as  one  can  see  the  cause  and  effect 
working  themselves  out  in  the  brain,  one  regards  it  as  not  being  thinking,  but  a 
sort  of  unimaginative  donkey-work.  From  this  point  of  view  one  might  be 
tempted  to  define  thinking  as  consisting  of  ‘those  mental  processes  that  we 
don’t  understand’.  If  this  is  right  then  to  make  a  thinking  machine  is  to  make 
one  which  does  interesting  things  without  our  really  understanding  quite  how 
it  is  done. 

Jefferson:  If  you  mean  that  we  don’t  know  the  wiring  in  men,  as  it  were,  that  is 
quite  true. 

Turing:  No,  that  isn’t  at  all  what  I  mean.  We  know  the  wiring  of  our  machine,  but 
it  already  happens  there  in  a  limited  sort  of  way.  Sometimes  a  computing 
machine  does  do  something  rather  weird  that  we  hadn’t  expected.  In  principle 
one  could  have  predicted  it,  but  in  practice  it’s  usually  too  much  trouble. 
Obviously  if  one  were  to  predict  everything  a  computer  was  going  to  do  one 
might  just  as  well  do  without  it. 

Newman:  It  is  quite  true  that  people  are  disappointed  when  they  discover  what  the 
big  computing  machines  actually  do,  which  is  just  to  add  and  multiply,  and  use 
the  results  to  decide  what  further  additions  and  multiplications  to  do.  ‘  That’s 
not  thinking’,  is  the  natural  comment,  but  this  is  rather  begging  the  question.  If 
you  go  into  one  of  the  ancient  churches  in  Ravenna  you  see  some  most  beautiful 
pictures  round  the  walls,  but  if  you  peer  at  them  through  binoculars  you  might 
say,  ‘Why,  they  aren’t  really  pictures  at  all,  but  just  a  lot  of  little  coloured  stones 
with  cement  in  between.’  The  machine’s  processes  are  mosaics  of  very  simple 
standard  parts,  but  the  designs  can  be  of  great  complexity,  and  it  is  not  obvious 
where  the  limit  is  to  the  patterns  of  thought  they  could  imitate. 

Braithwaite:  But  how  many  stones  are  there  in  your  mosaic?  Jefferson,  is  there  a 
sufficient  multiplicity  of  the  cells  in  the  brain  for  them  to  behave  like  a 
computing  machine? 

Jefferson:  Yes,  there  are  thousands,  tens  of  thousands  more  cells  in  the  brain  than 
there  are  in  a  computing  machine,  because  the  present  machine  contains — 
how  many  did  you  say? 

Turing:  Half  a  million  digits.  I  think  we  can  assume  that  is  the  equivalent  of  half  a 
million  nerve  cells. 

Braithwaite:  If  the  brain  works  like  a  computing  machine  then  the  present 
computing  machine  cannot  do  all  the  things  the  brain  does.  Agreed;  but  if  a 
computing  machine  were  made  that  could  do  all  the  things  the  brain  does, 
wouldn’t  it  require  more  digits  than  there  is  room  for  in  the  brain? 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  501 

Jefferson:  Well,  I  don’t  know.  Suppose  that  it  is  right  to  equate  digits  in  a  machine 
with  nerve  cells  in  a  brain.  There  are  various  estimates,  somewhere  between 
ten  thousand  million  and  fifteen  thousand  million  cells  are  supposed  to  be 
there.  Nobody  knows  for  certain,  you  see.  It  is  a  colossal  number.  You  would 
need  20,000  or  more  of  your  machines  to  equate  digits  with  nerve  cells.  But  it 
is  not,  surely,  just  a  question  of  size.  There  would  be  too  much  logic  in  your 
huge  machine.  It  wouldn’t  be  really  like  a  human  output  of  thought.  To  make 
it  more  like,  a  lot  of  the  machine  parts  would  have  to  be  designed  quite 
differently  to  give  greater  flexibility  and  more  diverse  possibilities  of  use.  It’s  a 
very  tall  order  indeed. 

Turing:  It  really  is  the  size  that  matters  in  this  case.  It  is  the  amount  of  infor¬ 
mation  that  can  be  stored  up.  If  you  think  of  something  very  complicated  that 
you  want  one  of  these  machines  to  do,  you  may  find  the  particular  machine 
you  have  got  won’t  do,  but  if  any  machine  can  do  it  at  all,  then  it  can  be  done 
by  your  first  computer,  simply  increased  in  its  storage  capacity. 

Jefferson:  If  we  are  really  to  get  near  to  anything  that  can  be  truly  called  ‘thinking’ 
the  effects  of  external  stimuli  cannot  be  missed  out;  the  intervention  of  all 
sorts  of  extraneous  factors,  like  the  worries  of  having  to  make  one’s  living,  or 
pay  one’s  taxes,  or  get  food  that  one  likes.  These  are  not  in  any  sense  minor 
factors,  they  are  very  important  indeed,  and  worries  concerned  with  them  may 
greatly  interfere  with  good  thinking,  especially  with  creative  thinking.  You  see 
a  machine  has  no  environment,  and  man  is  in  constant  relation  to  his 
environment,  which,  as  it  were  punches  him  whilst  he  punches  back.  There 
is  a  vast  background  of  memories  in  a  man’s  brain  that  each  new  idea  or 
experience  has  to  fit  in  with.  I  wonder  if  you  could  tell  me  how  far  a  calculating 
machine  meets  that  situation.  Most  people  agree  that  man’s  first  reaction  to  a 
new  idea  (such  as  the  one  we  are  discussing  today)  is  one  of  rejection,  often 
immediate  and  horrified  denial  of  it.  I  don’t  see  how  a  machine  could  as  it 
were  say  ‘Now  Professor  Newman  or  Mr.  Turing,  I  don’t  like  this  programme 
at  all  that  you’ve  just  put  into  me,  in  fact  I’m  not  going  to  have  anything  to  do 
with  it.’ 

Newman:  One  difficulty  about  answering  that  is  one  that  Turing  has  already 
mentioned.  If  someone  says,  ‘Could  a  machine  do  this,  e.g.  could  it  say  “I 
don’t  like  the  programme  you  have  just  put  into  me”  ’,  and  a  programme  for 
doing  that  very  thing  is  duly  produced,  it  is  apt  to  have  an  artificial  and  ad  hoc 
air,  and  appear  to  be  more  of  a  trick  than  a  serious  answer  to  the  question.  It  is 
like  those  passages  in  the  Bible,  which  worried  me  as  a  small  boy,  that  say  that 
such  and  such  was  done  ‘that  the  prophecy  might  be  fulfilled  which  says’  so 
and  so.  This  always  seemed  to  me  a  most  unfair  way  of  making  sure  that  the 
prophecy  came  true.  If  I  answer  your  question,  Jefferson,  by  making  a  routine 
which  simply  caused  the  machine  to  say  just  the  words  ‘Newman  and  Turing,  I 
don’t  like  your  programme’,  you  would  certainly  feel  this  was  a  rather  childish 


502  I  Turing,  Braithwaite,  Jefferson,  Newman 

trick,  and  not  the  answer  to  what  you  really  wanted  to  know.  But  yet  it’s  hard 
to  pin  down  what  you  want. 

Jefferson:  I  want  the  machine  to  reject  the  problem  because  it  offends  it  in  some 
way.  That  leads  me  to  enquire  what  the  ingredients  are  of  ideas  that  we  reject 
because  we  instinctively  don’t  care  for  them.  I  don’t  know  why  I  like  some 
pictures  and  some  music  and  am  bored  by  other  sorts.  But  I’m  not  going  to 
carry  that  line  on  because  we  are  all  different,  our  dislikes  are  based  on  our 
personal  histories  and  probably  too  on  small  differences  of  construction  in  all 
of  us,  I  mean  by  heredity.  Your  machines  have  no  genes,  no  pedigrees. 
Mendelian  inheritance  means  nothing  to  wireless  valves.  But  I  don’t  want  to 
score  debating  points!  We  ought  to  make  it  clear  that  not  even  Turing  thinks 
that  all  that  he  has  to  do  is  to  put  a  skin  on  the  machine  and  that  it  is  alive! 
We’ve  been  trying  for  a  more  limited  objective  whether  the  sort  of  thing  that 
machines  do  can  be  considered  as  thinking.  But  is  not  your  machine  more 
certain  than  any  human  being  of  getting  its  problem  right  at  once,  and 
infallibly? 

Newman:  Oh! 

Turing:  Computing  machines  aren’t  really  infallible  at  all.  Making  up  checks  on 
their  accuracy  is  quite  an  important  part  of  the  art  of  using  them.  Besides 
making  mistakes  they  sometimes  haven’t  done  quite  the  calculation  one  had 
expected,  and  one  gets  something  that  might  be  called  a  ‘misunderstanding’. 

Jefferson:  At  any  rate,  they  are  not  influenced  by  the  emotions.  You  have  only  to 
upset  a  person  enough  and  he  becomes  confused,  he  can’t  think  of  the  answers 
and  may  make  a  fool  of  himself.  It  is  high  emotional  content  of  mental 
processes  in  the  human  being  that  makes  him  quite  different  from  a  machine. 
It  seems  to  me  to  come  from  the  great  complexity  of  his  nervous  system  with 
its  1010  cells  and  also  from  his  endocrine  system  which  imports  all  sorts  of 
emotions  and  instincts,  such  as  those  to  do  with  sex.  Man  is  essentially  a 
chemical  machine,  he  is  much  affected  by  hunger  and  fatigue,  by  being  ‘out  of 
sorts’  as  we  say,  also  by  innate  judgements,  and  by  sexual  urges.  This  chemical 
side  is  tremendously  important,  not  the  least  so  because  the  brain  does 
exercise  a  remote  control  over  the  most  important  chemical  processes  that 
go  on  in  our  bodies.  Your  machines  don’t  have  to  bother  with  that,  with  being 
tired  or  cold  or  happy  or  satisfied.  They  show  no  delight  at  having  done 
something  never  done  before.  No,  they  are  ‘mentally’  simple  things.  I  mean 
that  however  complicated  their  structure  is  (and  I  know  it  is  very  compli¬ 
cated),  compared  with  man  they  are  very  simple  and  perform  their  tasks  with 
an  absence  of  distracting  thoughts  which  is  quite  inhuman. 

Braithwaite:  I’m  not  sure  that  I  agree.  I  believe  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  provide 
the  machine  with  something  corresponding  to  appetites,  or  other  ‘springs  of 
action’,  in  order  that  it  will  pay  enough  attention  to  relevant  features  in  its 
environment  to  be  able  to  learn  from  experience.  Many  psychologists  have 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  503 


held  that  the  emotions  in  men  are  by-products  of  their  appetites  and  that  they 
serve  a  biological  function  in  calling  higher  levels  of  mental  activity  into  play 
when  the  lower  levels  are  incapable  of  coping  with  an  external  situation.  For 
example,  one  does  not  feel  afraid  when  there  is  no  danger,  or  a  danger  which 
can  be  avoided  more  or  less  automatically:  fear  is  a  symptom  showing  that  the 
danger  has  to  be  met  by  conscious  thought.  Perhaps  it  will  be  impossible  to 
build  a  machine  capable  of  learning  in  general  from  experience  without 
incorporating  in  it  an  emotional  apparatus,  the  function  of  which  will  be  to 
switch  over  to  a  different  part  of  the  machine  when  the  external  environment 
differs  too  much  from  what  would  satisfy  the  machine’s  appetites  by  more 
than  a  certain  amount.  I  don’t  want  to  suggest  that  it  will  be  necessary  for  the 
machine  to  be  able  to  throw  a  fit  of  tantrums.  But  in  humans  tantrums 
frequently  fulfil  a  definite  function — that  of  escaping  from  responsibility; 
and  to  protect  a  machine  against  a  too  hostile  environment  it  may  be  essential 
to  allow  it,  as  it  were,  to  go  to  bed  with  a  neurosis,  or  psychogenic  illness — just 
as,  in  a  simpler  way,  it  is  provided  with  a  fuse  to  blow,  if  the  electric  power 
working  it  threatens  its  continued  existence. 

Turing:  Well,  I  don’t  envisage  teaching  the  machine  to  throw  temperamental 
scenes.  I  think  some  such  effects  are  likely  to  occur  as  a  sort  of  by-product  of 
genuine  teaching,  and  that  one  will  be  more  interested  in  curbing  such 
displays  than  in  encouraging  them.  Such  effects  would  probably  be  distinctly 
different  from  the  corresponding  human  ones,  but  recognisable  as  variations 
on  them.  This  means  that  if  the  machine  was  being  put  through  one  of  my 
imitation  tests,  it  would  have  to  do  quite  a  bit  of  acting,  but  if  one  was 
comparing  it  with  a  man  in  a  less  strict  sort  of  way  the  resemblance  might 
be  quite  impressive. 

Newman:  I  still  feel  that  too  much  of  our  argument  is  about  what  hypothetical 
future  machines  will  do.  It  is  all  very  well  to  say  that  a  machine  could  easily  be 
made  to  do  this  or  that,  but,  to  take  only  one  practical  point,  what  about  the 
time  it  would  take  to  do  it?  It  would  only  take  an  hour  or  two  to  make  up  a 
routine  to  make  our  Manchester  machine  analyse  all  possible  variations  of  the 
game  of  chess  right  out,  and  find  the  best  move  that  way — if  you  didn’t  mind 
its  taking  thousands  of  millions  of  years  to  run  through  the  routine.  Solving  a 
problem  on  the  machine  doesn’t  mean  finding  a  way  to  do  it  between  now  and 
eternity,  but  within  a  reasonable  time.  This  is  not  just  a  technical  detail  that 
will  be  taken  care  of  by  future  improvements.  It’s  most  unlikely  that  the 
engineers  can  ever  give  us  a  factor  of  more  than  a  thousand  or  two  times 
our  present  speeds.  To  assume  that  runs  that  would  take  thousands  of  millions 
of  years  on  our  present  machines  will  be  done  in  a  flash  on  machines  of  the 
future,  is  to  move  into  the  realms  of  science  fiction. 

Turing:  To  my  mind  this  time  factor  is  the  one  question  which  will  involve  all  the 
real  technical  difficulty.  If  one  didn’t  know  already  that  these  things  can  be 


504  I  Turing,  Braithwaite,  Jefferson,  Newman 

done  by  brains  within  a  reasonable  time  one  might  think  it  hopeless  to  try 
with  a  machine.  The  fact  that  a  brain  can  do  it  seems  to  suggest  that  the 
difficulties  may  not  really  be  so  bad  as  they  now  seem. 

Braithwaite:  I  agree  that  we  ought  not  to  extend  our  discussion  to  cover  whether 
calculating  machines  could  be  made  which  would  do  everything  that  a  man 
can  do.  The  point  is,  surely,  whether  they  can  do  all  that  it  is  proper  to  call 
thinking.  Appreciation  of  a  picture  contains  elements  of  thinking,  but  it  also 
contains  elements  of  feeling;  and  we’re  not  concerned  with  whether  a  machine 
can  be  made  that  will  feel.  Similarly  with  moral  questions:  we’re  only  con¬ 
cerned  with  them  so  far  as  they  are  also  intellectual  ones.  We  haven’t  got  to 
give  the  machine  a  sense  of  duty  or  anything  corresponding  to  a  will:  still  less 
need  it  be  given  temptations  which  it  would  then  have  to  have  an  apparatus 
for  resisting.  All  that  it  has  got  to  do  in  order  to  think  is  to  be  able  to  solve, 
or  to  make  a  good  attempt  at  solving,  all  the  intellectual  problems  with  which 
it  might  be  confronted  by  the  environment  in  which  it  finds  itself.  This 
environment,  of  course,  must  include  Turing  asking  it  awkward  questions  as 
well  as  natural  events  such  as  being  rained  upon,  or  being  shaken  up  by  an 
earthquake. 

Newman :  But  I  thought  it  was  you  who  said  that  a  machine  wouldn’t  be  able  to 
learn  to  adjust  to  its  environment  if  it  hadn’t  been  provided  with  a  set  of 
appetites  and  all  that  went  with  them? 

Braithwaite:  Yes,  certainly.  But  the  problems  raised  by  a  machine  having  appetites 
are  not  properly  our  concern  today.  It  may  be  the  case  that  it  wouldn’t  be  able  to 
learn  from  experience  without  them;  but  we’re  only  required  to  consider 
whether  it  would  be  able  to  learn  at  all — since  I  agree  that  being  able  to  learn 
is  an  essential  part  of  thinking.  So  oughtn’t  we  to  get  back  to  something  centred 
on  thinking?  Can  a  machine  make  up  new  concepts,  for  example? 

Newman:  There  are  really  two  questions  that  can  be  asked  about  machines  and 
thinking,  first,  what  do  we  require  before  we  agree  that  the  machine  does 
everything  that  we  call  thinking?  This  is  really  what  we  have  been  talking  about 
for  most  of  the  time;  but  there  is  also  another  interesting  and  important 
question:  Where  does  the  doubtful  territory  begin?  What  is  the  nearest  thing 
to  straight  computing  that  the  present  machines  perhaps  can’t  do? 

Braithwaite:  And  what  would  your  own  answer  be? 

Newman:  I  think  perhaps  to  solve  mathematical  problems  for  which  no  method 
is  known,  in  the  way  that  men  do;  to  find  new  methods.  This  is  a  much  more 
modest  aim  than  inventing  new  mathematical  concepts.  What  happens  when 
you  try  to  solve  a  new  problem  in  the  ordinary  way  is  that  you  think  about  it 
for  a  few  seconds,  or  a  few  years,  trying  out  all  the  analogies  you  can  think  of 
with  problems  that  have  been  solved,  and  then  you  have  an  idea.  You  try  it  out 
in  detail.  If  it  is  no  good  you  must  wait  for  another  idea.  This  is  a  little  like  the 
chess-problem  routine,  where  one  move  after  another  is  tried,  but  with  one 


Can  Automatic  Calculating  Machines  Be  Said  To  Think?  I  505 


very  important  difference,  that  if  I  am  even  a  moderately  good  mathematician 
the  ideas  that  I  get  are  not  just  random  ones,  but  are  pre-selected  so  that  there 
is  an  appreciable  chance  that  after  a  few  trials  one  of  them  will  be  successful. 
Henry  Moore  says  about  the  studies  he  does  for  his  sculpture,  ‘When  the  work 
is  more  than  an  exercise,  inexplicable  jumps  occur.  This  is  where  the  imagin¬ 
ation  comes  in.’  If  a  machine  could  really  be  got  to  imitate  this  sudden  pounce 
on  an  idea,  I  believe  that  everyone  would  agree  that  it  had  begun  to  think,  even 
though  it  didn’t  have  appetites  or  worry  about  the  income  tax.  And  suppose 
that  we  also  stuck  to  what  we  know  about  the  physiology  of  human  thinking, 
how  much  would  that  amount  to,  Jefferson? 

Jefferson:  We  know  a  great  deal  about  the  end-product,  thinking  itself.  Are  not 
the  contents  of  our  libraries  and  museums  the  total  up  to  date?  Experimental 
psychology  has  taught  us  a  lot  about  the  way  that  we  use  memory  and 
association  of  ideas,  how  we  fill  in  gaps  in  knowledge  and  improvise  from  a 
few  given  facts.  But  exactly  how  we  do  it  in  terms  of  nerve  cell  actions  we  don’t 
know.  We  are  particularly  ignorant  of  the  very  point  that  you  mentioned  just 
now,  Newman,  the  actual  physiology  of  the  pounce  on  an  idea,  of  the  sudden 
inspiration.  Thinking  is  clearly  a  motor  activity  of  the  brain’s  cells,  a  sugges¬ 
tion  supported  by  the  common  experience  that  so  many  people  think  better 
with  a  pen  in  their  hand  than  viva  voce  or  by  reverie  and  reflection.  But  you 
can’t  so  far  produce  ideas  in  a  man’s  mind  by  stimulating  his  exposed  brain 
here  or  there  electrically.  It  would  have  been  really  exciting  if  one  could  have 
done  that — if  one  could  have  perhaps  excited  original  thoughts  by  local 
stimulation.  It  can’t  be  done.  Nor  does  the  electro-encephalograph  show  us 
how  the  process  of  thinking  is  carried  out.  It  can’t  tell  you  what  a  man  is 
thinking  about.  We  can  trace  the  course,  say,  of  a  page  of  print  or  of  a  stream 
of  words  into  the  brain,  but  we  eventually  lose  them.  If  we  could  follow  them 
to  their  storage  places  we  still  couldn’t  see  how  they  are  reassembled  later  as 
ideas.  You  have  the  great  advantage  of  knowing  how  your  machine  was  made. 
We  only  know  that  we  have  in  the  human  nervous  system  a  concern  compact 
in  size  and  in  its  way  perfect  for  its  job.  We  know  a  great  deal  about  its 
microscopical  structure  and  its  connections.  If  fact,  we  know  everything  except 
how  these  myriads  of  cells  allow  us  to  think.  But,  Newman,  before  we  say  ‘not 
only  does  this  machine  think  but  also  here  in  this  machine  we  have  an  exact 
counterpart  of  the  wiring  and  circuits  of  human  nervous  systems,’  I  ought  to 
ask  whether  machines  have  been  built  or  could  be  built  which  are  as  it  were 
anatomically  different,  and  yet  produce  the  same  work. 

Newman:  The  logical  plan  of  all  of  them  is  rather  similar,  but  certainly  their 
anatomy,  and  I  suppose  you  could  say  their  physiology,  varies  a  lot. 

Jefferson:  Yes,  that’s  what  I  imagined — we  cannot  then  assume  that  any  one  of 
these  electronic  machines  is  a  replica  of  part  of  a  man’s  brain  even  though  the 
result  of  its  actions  has  to  be  conceded  as  thought.  The  real  value  of  the 


506  I  Turing,  Braithwaite,  Jefferson,  Newman 

machine  to  you  is  its  end  results,  its  performance,  rather  than  that  its  plan 
reveals  to  us  a  model  of  our  brains  and  nerves.  Its  usefulness  lies  in  the  fact 
that  electricity  travels  along  wires  2  or  3  million  times  faster  than  nerve 
impulses  pass  along  nerves.  You  can  set  it  to  do  things  that  man  would  need 
thousands  of  lives  to  complete.  But  that  old  slow  coach,  man,  is  the  one  with 
the  ideas — or  so  I  think.  It  would  be  fun  some  day,  Turing,  to  listen  to  a 
discussion,  say  on  the  Fourth  Programme,  between  two  machines  on  why 
human  beings  think  that  they  think! 


Artificial  Life 

Jack  Copeland 


1.  What  is ‘Artificial  Life? 

The  highly  interdisciplinary  field  of  Artificial  Life  was  so  named  by  Christopher 
Langton,  a  physicist  working  at  the  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory.1  In  1987 
Langton  organized  at  Los  Alamos  what  he  described  as  an  ‘interdisciplinary 
workshop  on  the  synthesis  and  simulation  of  living  systems’.2  The  workshop 
was  a  rallying  point,  bringing  together  researchers  with  shared  interests  and 
diverse  backgrounds. 

Artificial  Life  (‘A-Life’)  aims  to  achieve  theoretical  understanding  of  naturally 
occurring  biological  life,  in  particular  of  the  most  conspicuous  feature  of  living 
matter,  its  ability  to  self- organize,  i.e.  to  develop  form  and  structure  spontan¬ 
eously.  Langton  defines  Artificial  Life  as  ‘the  study  of  man-made  systems  that 
exhibit  behaviors  characteristic  of  natural  living  systems’.3  A-Life,  he  says,  ‘com¬ 
plements  the  traditional  biological  sciences  concerned  with  the  analysis  of  living 
organisms  by  attempting  to  synthesise  life-like  behaviors  within  computers  and 
other  artificial  media’.4 

The  use  of  computers  to  simulate  living  and  life-like  systems  is  central  to 
A-Life.  Langton  says: 

Computers  should  be  thought  of  as  an  important  laboratory  tool  for  the  study  of  life, 
substituting  for  the  array  of  incubators,  culture  dishes,  microscopes,  electrophoretic  gels, 
pipettes,  centrifuges,  and  other  assorted  wet-lab  paraphernalia,  one  simple-to-master 
piece  of  experimental  equipment.5 

Langton  even  suggests  that  the  ‘ultimate  goal  of  the  study  of  artificial  life 
would  be  to  create  “life”  in  some  other  medium,  ideally  a  virtual  medium  where 
the  essence  of  life  has  been  abstracted  from  the  details  of  its  implementation  in 
any  particular  hardware’.6 

1  C.  G.  Langton,  ‘Studying  Artificial  Life  with  Cellular  Automata’,  Physica  D,  22  (1986),  120-49. 

2  C.  G.  Langton  (ed.),  Artificial  Life:  The  Proceedings  of  an  Interdisciplinary  Workshop  on  the  Synthesis  and 
Simulation  of  Living  Systems  (Redwood  City,  Calif.:  Addison-Wesley,  1989). 

3  C.  G.  Langton,  ‘Artificial  Life’,  in  Langton,  Artificial  Life,  1. 

4  Ibid. 

5  Ibid.  32. 

6  Langton,  ‘Studying  Artificial  Life  with  Cellular  Automata’,  147. 


508  I  Jack  Copeland 

2.  Morphogenesis 

Turing  was  the  earliest  pioneer  of  computer-based  A-Life:  he  was  the  first  to  use 
computer  simulation  to  investigate  a  theory  of  the  development  of  organization 
and  pattern  in  living  things.7  Early  in  1951,  the  world’s  first  commercially 
manufactured  general-purpose  electronic  digital  computer,  the  Manchester- 
built  Ferranti  Mark  I,  was  installed  in  the  Computing  Machine  Laboratory  at 
Manchester  University.8  Turing  immediately  set  about  using  the  machine  to 
model  biological  growth.  In  February  1951  he  wrote  to  a  colleague  at  the 
National  Physical  Laboratory: 

Our  new  machine  [the  Ferranti  Mark  I]  is  to  start  arriving  on  Monday.  I  am  hoping  as  one 
of  the  first  jobs  to  do  something  about  ‘chemical  embryology’.  In  particular  I  think  one 
can  account  for  the  appearance  of  Fibonacci  numbers  in  connection  with  fir-cones.9 

In  a  Fibonacci  number-series,  each  number,  except  for  the  first  two,  is  the  sum  of 
the  two  previous  numbers:  for  example  1,  3,  4,  7,  11 . . . 

In  brief,  Turing’s  ‘chemical  embryology’  is  the  hypothesis  that  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  anatomical  structure  in  the  animal  or  plant  embryo  is  a  result  of  the  fact 
that  diffusing  chemicals  reacting  with  one  another  can  form  spatial  patterns.  This 
is  a  thoroughly  reductionist  view:  forms  found  in  living  matter  are  accounted  for 
by  the  fact  that,  under  appropriate  conditions,  sheer  chemical  reaction  produces 
pattern  and  form. 

Turing  took  his  cue  from  the  zoologist  D’Arcy  Thompson  (to  whose  work 
Turing  refers  at  the  end  of  Chapter  15).  D’Arcy  Thompson  held  that  the  forms  of 
living  things,  no  less  than  naturally  occurring  forms  in  inorganic  matter,  are  to 
be  explained  in  terms  of ‘the  operation  of  physical  forces  or  mathematical  laws’.10 

Cell  and  tissue,  shell  and  bone,  leaf  and  flower,  are  so  many  portions  of  matter,  and  it  is  in 
obedience  to  the  laws  of  physics  that  their  particles  have  been  moved,  moulded  and 
conformed.  . . .  The  form ...  of  any  portion  of  matter,  whether  it  be  living  or  dead,  and 


7  Another  early  pioneer  of  A-Life  was  the  neurophysiologist  W.  Grey  Walter  (a  founder  of  the  Ratio 
Club,  of  which  Turing  was  also  a  member).  His  famous  ‘tortoises’ — built  from  about  1949  onwards — were 
mobile,  battery-powered  devices  exhibiting  life-like  properties.  He  constructed  them  in  order  to  show  that 
seemingly  complex  behaviour  can  result  from  simple  mechanisms  (W.  Grey  Walter,  The  Living  Brain 
(London:  Gerald  Duckworth,  1953),  82-7  and  appendix  B).  Although  digital  computers  were  not  involved, 
Grey  Walter’s  work  certainly  conforms  to  Langton’s  description  given  above:  ‘Artificial  Life  . . .  attempt  [s]  to 
synthesise  life-like  behaviors  within  computers  and  other  artificial  media ’  (italics  added). 

8  A  digital  facsimile  of  Turing’s  Programmers'  Handbook  for  Manchester  Electronic  Computer  (University 
of  Manchester  Computing  Machine  Laboratory,  1950)  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/programmers_handbook>. 

9  Letter  from  Turing  to  Michael  Woodger,  undated,  received  12  Feb.  1951  (in  the  Woodger  Papers, 
National  Museum  of  Science  and  Industry,  Kensington,  London;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  the  Turing  Archive 
for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/turing_woodger_feb51>). 

10  W.  D’Arcy  Thompson,  On  Growth  and  Form  (2nd  edn.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press, 
1942),  3. 


Artificial  Life  I  509 

the  changes  of  form  which  are  apparent  in  its . . .  growth,  may  in  all  cases  alike  be  described 
as  due  to  the  action  of  force.11 

Concerning  the  puzzling  fact  that  the  scales  of  a  fir-cone,  or  the  florets  of  a 
sunflower,  are  grouped  together  in  numbers  that  form  a  Fibonacci  series,  D’Arcy 
Thompson  boldly  declared: 

while  the  Fibonacci  series  stares  us  in  the  face  in  the  fir-cone,  it  does  so  for  mathematical 
reasons;  and  its  supposed  usefulness,  and  the  hypothesis  of  its  introduction  into  plant- 
structure  through  natural  selection,  are  matters  which  deserve  no  place  in  the  plain  study 
of  botanical  phenomena.12 

Turing  summarized  his  own  theory  as  the  suggestion  that  ‘certain  well-known 
physical  laws  are  sufficient  to  account  for  many  of  the  facts’  of  morphogenesis 
(p.  519).  (‘Morphogenesis’  means  ‘generation  of  form’.)  Turing  described  an 
idealized  chemical  mechanism,  now  called  the  reaction-diffusion  model.  He 
showed  that  this  mechanism  could  lead  to  a  number  of  simple  but  life-like 
patterns  and  forms.  The  reaction-diffusion  model  is  the  topic  of  Chapter  15, 
‘The  Chemical  Basis  of  Morphogenesis’.  ‘The  Chemical  Basis  of  Morphogenesis’ 
has  been  widely  cited  in  the  biological  literature  and  today  reaction-diffusion 
remains  a  possible,  although  still  unconfirmed,  explanation  of  aspects  of  the 
generation  of  biological  pattern  and  form. 

The  geneticist  C.  H.  Waddington  commented  in  a  letter  to  Turing  in  1952  that 
the  most  clear-cut  application  of  Turing’s  theory  appeared  to  be  ‘in  the  arising  of 
spots,  streaks,  and  flecks  of  various  kinds  in  apparently  uniform  areas  such  as  the 
wings  of  butterflies,  the  shells  of  molluscs,  the  skin  of  tigers,  leopards,  etc’.13 
Modern  computer  simulations  of  Turing’s  reaction-diffusion  mechanism  have 
indeed  produced  leopard-like  spots,  cheetah-like  spots,  and  giraffe-like  stripes,  as 
well  as  textures  reminiscent  of  reptile  skin,  corals,  and  the  surfaces  of  some 
fungi.14  Turing  himself,  however,  envisaged  diverse  applications  of  his  theory 
(as  he  indicated  in  the  letter  to  biologist  J.  Z.  Young  quoted  below),  includ¬ 
ing  leaf  arrangements  and  the  appearance  of  Fibonacci  sequences,  and 
phenomena  such  as  gastrulation.  (Gastrulation  is  a  process  of  rearrange¬ 
ment  of  cells  in  the  spherical  embryo,  involving  the  folding  inwards  of  part 
of  the  surface,  producing  a  depression  akin  to  the  dent  formed  by  poking  a 
balloon  with  a  finger.)  Furthermore,  Turing  described  his  research  into 


11  Ibid.  10,  16. 

12  Ibid.  933. 

13  Letter  from  Waddington  to  Turing  (11  Sept.  1952).  The  letter  is  among  the  Turing  Papers  in  the 
Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  D  5). 

14  J.  D.  Murray,  ‘A  Pre-pattern  Formation  Mechanism  for  Animal  Coat  Markings’,  Journal  of  Theoretical 
Biology,  88  (1981),  161-99;  G.  Turk,  ‘Generating  Textures  on  Arbitrary  Surfaces  Using  Reaction-Diffusion’, 
Computer  Graphics,  25  (1991),  289-98;  A.  Witkin  and  M.  Kass,  ‘Reaction-Diffusion  Textures’,  Computer 
Graphics,  25  (1991),  299-308. 


510  I  Jack  Copeland 


morphogenesis  as  ‘not  altogether  unconnected’  to  his  work  on  neural  net¬ 
works  (see  Chapter  10). 

Turing  simulated  the  reaction-diffusion  mechanism  using  the  Ferranti  com¬ 
puter.  A  mathematician  using  paper  and  pencil  to  analyse  the  behaviour  of  a 
reaction-diffusion  system  risks  becoming  overwhelmed  by  formidable  math¬ 
ematical  complexity,  and  must  make  (what  Turing  calls)  ‘simplifying  assump¬ 
tions’.  Turing  explains  that  use  of  the  computer  enables  such  assumptions  to  be 
dispensed  with  to  some  extent.  This  freedom  enables  Turing  to  employ  non¬ 
linear  differential  equations  to  describe  the  chemical  interactions  hypothesized 
by  his  theory.15  Non-linear  differential  equations  are  mathematically  intractable. 
Turing  used  the  computer  to  explore  in  detail  particular  cases  of  interactions 
governed  by  equations  of  this  type.  He  may  well  have  been  the  first  researcher  to 
engage  in  the  computer-assisted  exploration  of  non-linear  systems.16  (It  was  not 
until  Benoit  Mandelbrot’s  discovery  of  the  ‘Mandelbrot  set’  in  1979  that  the 
computer-assisted  investigation  of  non-linear  systems  gained  widespead 
attention.17) 

Turing’s  work  on  morphogenesis  was  in  every  respect  ahead  of  its  time.  He 
died  while  in  the  midst  of  this  groundbreaking  work,  leaving  a  large  pile  of 
handwritten  notes  and  various  programmes.18  This  material  is  still  not  fully 
understood. 

The  computer  programme  shown  in  Figure  1,  which  is  in  Turing’s  own 
hand,  formed  part  of  his  study  of  the  development  of  the  fir-cone.  He  also 
investigated  the  development  of  the  sunflower.  The  photograph  and  diagram 
shown  in  Figure  2  are  from  his  notes.19 


3.  The  Reaction-Diffusion  Model 

In  reaction-diffusion,  two  or  more  chemicals  diffuse  through  the  embryo  reacting 
with  each  other.  Turing  showed  that  under  certain  conditions  a  stable  pattern 
of  chemical  concentrations  will  be  reached.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  an  artifi¬ 
cially  simple  embryo  consisting  of  nothing  but  a  ring  of  twenty  cells,  reaction- 
diffusion  will  produce  a  stable,  regular  pattern  of  concentration  and  rarefaction 
around  the  circumference  of  the  ring.  The  points  of  highest  concentration 


15  See  p.  561  of  Chapter  15;  also  section  2  of  Turing’s  ‘Morphogen  Theory  of  Phyllotaxis’,  in  Morphogen- 
esis:  Collected  Works  of  A.  M.  Turing,  ed.  P.  T.  Saunders  (Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1992). 

16  Unless  perhaps  the  computer-assisted  modelling  of  non-linear  systems  was  first  undertaken  a  little 
earlier,  in  secret,  by  members  of  the  Los  Alamos  group  in  connection  with  nuclear  explosions. 

17  B.  B.  Mandelbrot,  The  Fractal  Geometry  of  Nature  (New  York:  Freeman,  1977;  revised  and  expanded 
1982,  1983).  For  a  popular  exposition  see  J.  Gleick,  Chaos:  Making  a  New  Science  (London:  Cardinal,  1988). 

18  Some — but  by  no  means  all — of  this  material  appears  in  Morphogenesis,  ed.  Saunders. 

19  The  notes  and  programme  sheets  are  among  the  Turing  Papers  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s 
College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  references  C  25,  C  27). 


Artificial  Life  I  511 


MANCHESTER  UNIVERSITY  COMPUTING  MACHINE  LABORATORY 


Programme  Sheet  1  (b) 


ROUTINE  Ihtu- 


(a.  c-/‘wiT''‘r'w  r' 

.-r «J  ire  1  N  K 


IhtoM. 

•  4 

►  t 

) 

/  1C.  M/  <-'2. 


L 

/ 

J 

M 

t  :  1 

/ 

L*. 

o 

pj 

E 

“Jt 

w 

f\ 

E 

* 

/ 

<s 

Gr 

7" 

V  O 

y 

o 


/ 

/ 

<3t 


/ 

A 

A»  : 

y 

» 

A 

i  , 

ft 

/ 

t 

Lr  > 

y 

/ 

: 

£ 

f" 

/ 

y 

S 

V  K 

w 

* 

S 

V 


'c 


V  K 

t 

C 



N 

u 

V  *< 

/ 

£ 

u 

M 

/ ' 

A 

i 

-i 

V  I* 

/ 


/  K 

Ca 

O 

D 

V  .  * . 

u 

o 

D 

5f 

r 

T 

✓ 

R 

/  ./ 

u 


R 

u 

« 

T 

ft 

J 

w  ■ 

/ 

/ 

J 

«5i 

K 


A) 

N 

7>  £ 

7/ 

j 

N 

A 

K 

✓ 

F 

H 

A/ 

F 

$ 

/ 

C 

if  •/ 

/ 

C 

G-e- 

-z- 

-7 


K 


4" 

K 

V) 

u 

T 

;4 

w 

c 

T 

Mia- 

. 

<  O 

Z 

\ 

w 

ft 

Z 

lr 

4  is/ 

T 

/ 

L 

A 

✓ 

/ 

: 

4. 

L 

£  c 

r 

* 

W 

✓ 

/ 

/ 

f 

X  ^ 

✓ 

T* 

W 

- 

6a. 

© 

H 

ft* 

w 


/ 

IT  • 

y 

d. 

H 

Oa. 


Y 

£  1 

E 

/ 

7> 

1  / 


Y 

- 

(A 


P 

_ 

/ 

w  dr 

/ 

ir 

*r 

P 

r/ 

L - 

Q 

/ 

/ 

r>  ^ 

[  ✓ 

T 

Uria*** 

Q 

V 

r 

A 

O 

* 

k" 

V 

X  >• 

rV 

O 

»v 


/ 

B 

e 

£ 

r 

B 

r 

/ 


( 

JC. 

L. 

G 

* 

/ 

r 

J 

G 

V 

N 

r 

✓ 

kf 

J 

hrjL. 

/£_ 

z 

X 

fr-r- 

»» 

w- 

s 

✓ 

tru-  j 

M 

fc” 

/  . 

/ 

A~7  ,  / 

ft-rr 

"7" 

T 

M 

p 

✓ 

✓ 

l 

cl. 

(  ( 

X 

/ 

’  ✓ 

/ 

e 

iv 

// 

X>  r/ 

"7 

X 

* 

A/ 

/ 

✓ 

- 

l 

' 

/ 

A 

*• 

i 

A- 

«r 

K 

V 

l 

J" 

✓ 

/ 

n* 

( 

(  A 

•+J 

\ 

/ 

VL 

•• 

{ 

V  / 

t* 

z.  1 

£ 

k 

%J 

/ 

/ 

* 

/ 

Figure  1. 


occur  equidistantly  from  one  another.  Turing  picturesquely  describes  this  pattern 
as  a  stationary  ‘chemical  wave’.  His  suggestion  is  that  at  the  points  of  high 
concentration  around  the  ring,  the  chemical  acts  as  a  trigger  to  stimulate  growth. 
For  example,  a  ring  of  cells  might  sprout  leaves  at  these  points,  or  tentacles, 
producing  a  structure  reminiscent  of  Hydra  (‘something  like  a  sea-anenome  but 
liv[ing]  in  fresh  water  and  hav[ing]  from  about  five  to  ten  tentacles’  (p.  556)). 
Regular  but  non-stationary  patterns  of  concentration — travelling  waves — are 
also  possible.  Turing  suggested  that  the  movements  of  the  tail  of  a  spermatozoon 
may  provide  an  example  of  these  travelling  waves. 


512  I  Jack  Copeland 


It  might  be  wondered  how  genes  fit  into  this  picture.  Given  our  current 
knowledge  of  the  role  played  by  genes  in  the  determination  of  anatomical 
structure,  is  Turing’s  theory  archaic?  Not  at  all.  On  Turing’s  account,  reaction- 
diffusion  is  the  mechanism  by  which  genes  determine  the  anatomical  structure  of 
the  resulting  organism.  The  function  of  genes,  he  suggested,  is  catalytic.  The 
genes  are  presumed  to  catalyse  the  production  of  appropriate  chemicals,  so 
setting  reaction-diffusion  in  train. 

Turing  calls  the  chemicals  that  diffuse  and  react  ‘morphogens’,  suggesting 
hormones  as  an  example.  However,  his  aim  is  not  to  give  a  taxonomy  of 
morphogens  or  to  describe  specific  morphogens,  but  rather  to  demonstrate  in 
the  abstract  that,  given  certain  realistic  assumptions  about  unspecified  morpho¬ 
gens,  reaction-diffusion  will  produce  pattern.  These  assumptions  include  the 
rates  at  which  the  morphogens  diffuse  between  the  cells,  the  rates  at  which  the 
various  chemical  reactions  between  the  morphogens  take  place,  and  the  ways  in 
which  these  rates  change  (due,  for  example,  to  increases  in  temperature  in  the 
tissue,  or  increases  in  concentration  of  morphogens  that  act  as  catalysts).  The 
initial  concentrations  of  the  morphogens  must  be  specified,  and  the  number, 
dimensions,  and  positions  of  the  cells  making  up  the  mass  of  tissue  through 
which  the  morphogens  diffuse.  This  mass — the  embryo — is  assumed  to  be 
initially  homogeneous.  (Other  features  of  the  situation,  such  as  the  motions 
and  elasticities  of  the  cells,  are  ignored  in  order  to  simplify  the  model.) 

Turing  represents  the  reactions  between  morphogens  purely  schematically, 
making  no  assumptions  concerning  the  actual  chemical  compositions  of  the 
substances  involved.  For  example,  two  reactions  might  be  specified  like  this: 
morphogens  X  and  Y  react  to  produce  Z;  Z  and  morphogen  A  react  to  produce 


Figure  2.  Turing’s  numbering  of  the  individual  florets  of  a  sunflower. 


20  Editor’s  note.  A  blastula  is  a  hollow  sphere  of  cells,  one  cell  in  thickness. 


Artificial  Life  I  513 

2  Y.  The  first  reaction  therefore  depletes  the  supply  of  morphogen  Y,  while  the 
second  tends  to  build  up  the  concentration  of  Y. 

Uniform  diffusion  and  uniform  reaction  in  a  uniform  mass  of  tissue  can 
produce  only  uniformity,  not  differentiation  and  pattern.  Some  sort  of  sym¬ 
metry-breaker  must  be  thrown  into  the  mix.  As  Turing  put  it  (p.  525): 

There  appears  superficially  to  be  a  difficulty  confronting  this  theory  of  morphogenesis, 
or,  indeed,  almost  any  other  theory  of  it.  An  embryo  in  its  spherical  blastula20  stage 
has  spherical  symmetry,  or  if  there  are  any  deviations  from  perfect  symmetry,  they  cannot 
be  regarded  as  of  any  particular  importance,  for  the  deviations  vary  greatly  from  embryo 
to  embryo  within  a  species,  though  the  organisms  developed  from  them  are  barely 
distinguishable.  One  may  take  it  therefore  that  there  is  perfect  spherical  symmetry.  But 
a  system  which  has  spherical  symmetry,  and  whose  state  is  changing  because  of  chemical 
reactions  and  diffusion,  will  remain  spherically  symmetrical  forever.  ...  It  certainly 
cannot  result  in  an  organism  such  as  a  horse,  which  is  not  spherically  symmetrical. 

Turing  suggested  various  possible  symmetry-breakers,  including  small  disturb¬ 
ances  caused  by  the  presence  of  anatomical  structures  neighbouring  the  embryo, 
and  purely  statistical  fluctuations  at  the  molecular  level.  An  example  of  the  latter  is 
statistical  fluctuation  in  the  number  of  molecules  of  a  given  morphogen  passing 
through  the  wall  of  a  cell,  so  producing  small  fluctuations  in  the  concentration  of 
that  morphogen  within  the  cell.  Turing’s  point  is  that  in  certain  circumstances, 
small  fluctuations  such  as  this  can  bring  about  large  effects,  just  as  a  small  nudge 
that  under  normal  circumstances  would  have  no  effect  on  a  person’s  balance  could 
be  enough  to  topple  someone  balancing  on  one  foot. 

Turing  demonstrated  that  under  appropriate  conditions  small  departures 
from  uniformity  can  indeed  lead  to  the  formation  of  chemical  waves. 


4.  Genetic  Algorithms 

An  important  concept  both  in  Artificial  Life  and  in  Artificial  Intelligence  is  that 
of  a  genetic  algorithm  (GA).  GAs  employ  methods  analogous  to  the  processes  of 
natural  evolution  in  order  to  produce  successive  generations  of  software  entities 
that  are  increasingly  fit  for  their  intended  purpose.  Turing  anticipated  the 
concept  of  a  genetic  algorithm  in  a  brief  passage  of  his  ‘Intelligent  Machinery’, 
where  he  described  what  he  called  a  ‘genetical  or  evolutionary  search’  (Chapter 
10,  p.  431;  see  also  Chapter  11,  p.  463,  and  the  introduction  to  Chapter  16, 
p.  565).  The  actual  term  ‘genetic  algorithm’  was  introduced  circa  1975  by  John 
Holland  and  his  research  group  at  the  University  of  Michigan.21  Holland’s  work 
is  responsible  for  the  current  intense  interest  in  GAs.  (Holland,  a  student  of 
Arthur  Burks,  was  influenced  by  von  Neumann’s  ideas — see  below.) 


21  J.  H.  Holland,  Adaptation  in  Natural  and  Artificial  Systems  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  1992),  p.  x. 


514  I  Jack  Copeland 


Turing  described  an  early  example  of  a  GA  in  connection  with  his  chess-player 
in  Chapter  16. 

One  of  the  first  GAs  to  be  implemented  (in  the  1950s)  formed  part  of  the 
learning  mechanism  of  Samuel’s  checkers  or  draughts  programme  mentioned 
above  in  Artificial  Intelligence’.22  Samuel’s  programme  used  heuristics  to  rank 
moves  and  board  positions  (the  programme  ‘looked  ahead’  as  many  as  ten  turns 
of  play).  To  speed  up  learning,  Samuel  would  set  up  two  copies  of  the  pro¬ 
gramme,  Alpha  and  Beta,  on  the  same  computer  and  leave  them  to  play  game 
after  game  with  each  other.  The  learning  procedure  consisted  in  the  computer 
making  small  numerical  changes  to  Alpha’s  ranking  procedure,  leaving  Beta’s 
unchanged,  and  then  comparing  Alpha’s  and  Beta’s  performance  over  a  few 
games.  If  Alpha  played  worse  than  Beta,  these  changes  to  the  ranking  procedure 
were  discarded,  but  if  Alpha  played  better  than  Beta  then  Beta’s  ranking  proced¬ 
ure  was  replaced  with  Alpha’s.  As  in  biological  evolution,  the  fitter  survived.  Over 
many  such  cycles  of  mutation  and  selection,  the  programme’s  quality  of  play 
increased  markedly. 

The  use  of  GAs  is  burgeoning,  in  AI  and  elsewhere.  In  one  application  a  GA- 
based  system  and  a  witness  to  a  crime  cooperate  to  generate  on-screen  faces  that 
become  closer  and  closer  to  the  recollected  face  of  the  criminal.23  In  A-Life, 
researchers  study  GAs  as  a  means  of  studying  the  process  of  evolution  itself. 


5.  John  von  Neumann  and  A-Life 

John  von  Neumann  was  another  important  early  pioneer  of  Artificial  Life.  In  his 
1948  Hixon  Symposium,  entitled  ‘The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata’, 
he  said: 

Natural  organisms  are,  as  a  rule,  much  more  complicated  and  subtle,  and  therefore  much 
less  well  understood  in  detail,  than  are  artificial  automata.  Nevertheless ...  a  good  deal  of 
our  experiences  and  difficulties  with  our  artificial  automata  can  be  to  some  extent 
projected  on  our  interpretations  of  natural  organisms.24 

Arthur  Burks  (who  edited  and  completed  von  Neumann’s  posthumously 
published  volume  Theory  of  Self-Reproducing  Automata,  listed  in  the  section  of 
Further  Reading)  wrote  this  concerning  von  Neumann’s  research  on  the  problem 
of  self-reproduction: 


22  A.  L.  Samuel,  ‘Some  Studies  in  Machine  Learning  Using  the  Game  of  Checkers’,  IBM  Journal  of 
Research  and  Development,  3  (1959),  211-29;  reprinted  in  E.  A.  Feigenbaum  and  J.  Feldman  (eds.), 
Computers  and  Thought  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1963). 

23  D.  E.  Goldberg,  ‘Genetic  and  Evolutionary  Algorithms  Come  of  Age’,  Communications  of  the  Associ¬ 
ation  for  Computing  Machinery,  37  (1994),  113-19. 

24  J.  von  Neumann,  ‘The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata’,  in  vol.  v  of  von  Neumann’s  Collected 
Works,  ed.  A.  H.  Taub  (Oxford:  Pergamon  Press,  1963),  288-9. 


Artificial  Life  I  515 


Von  Neumann  had  the  familiar  natural  phenomenon  of  self-reproduction  in  mind . . .  but 
he  was  not  trying  to  simulate  the  self-reproduction  of  a  natural  system  at  the  levels  of 
genetics  and  biochemistry.  He  wished  to  abstract  from  the  natural  self-reproduction 
problem  its  logical  form.25 

This  passage  is  quoted  approvingly  by  Langton,  who  italicizes  the  final  sentence 
and  comments: 

This  approach  is  the  first  to  capture  the  essence  of  Artificial  Life.  To  understand  the  field 
of  Artificial  Life,  one  need  only  replace  references  to  ‘self-reproduction’  in  the  above  with 
references  to  any  other  biological  phenomenon.26 

Von  Neumann  was  thinking  about  issues  relevant  to  A-Life  at  least  as  early  as 
1946.  In  a  letter  to  the  cyberneticist  Norbert  Wiener  (dated  29  November  1946), 
von  Neumann  wrote:  ‘I  did  think  a  good  deal  about  self-reproductive  mechan¬ 
isms.  I  can  formulate  the  problem  rigorously,  in  about  the  style  in  which  Turing 
did  it  for  his  mechanisms.’27  There  is  no  doubt  that  von  Neumann’s  theorizing 
about  self-reproduction  was  strongly  influenced  by  Turing’s  discovery  of  the 
universal  computing  machine  (or  ‘universal  automaton’,  as  von  Neumann  called 
it).  Von  Neumann’s  colleague  Herman  Goldstine  wrote: 

von  Neumann  had  a  profound  concern  for  automata.  In  particular,  he  always  had  a  deep 
interest  in  Turing’s  work.  . . .  Turing  proved  a  most  remarkable  and  unexpected  result.  . . . 
In  essence  what  he  showed  is  that  any  particular  automaton  can  be  described  by  a  finite  set 
of  instructions,  and  that  when  this  is  fed  to  his  universal  automaton  it  in  turn  imitates  the 
special  one.  . . .  Von  Neumann  was  enormously  intrigued  with  these  ideas,  and  he  started 
in  1947  working  on . . .  how  complex  a  device  or  construct  needed  to  be  in  order  to  be  self- 
reproductive.28 

In  his  Hixon  Symposium,  von  Neumann  said: 

For  the  question  which  concerns  me  here,  that  of  ‘self-reproduction’  of  automata, 
Turing’s  procedure  is  too  narrow  in  one  respect  only.  His  automata  are  purely  computing 
machines.  Their  output  is  a  piece  of  tape  with  zeros  and  ones  on  it.  What  is  needed ...  is 
an  automaton  whose  output  is  other  automata.  There  is,  however,  no  difficulty  in 
principle  in  dealing  with  this  broader  concept  and  in  deriving  from  it  the  equivalent  of 
Turing’s  result.  . . .  The  problem  of  self-reproduction  can ...  be  stated  like  this:  Can  one 
build  an  aggregate  out  of. . .  elements  in  such  a  manner  that  if  it  is  put  into  a  reservoir,  in 
which  there  float  all  these  elements  in  large  numbers,  it  will  then  begin  to  construct  other 
aggregates,  each  of  which  will  at  the  end  turn  out  to  be  another  automaton  exactly  like  the 


25  A.  W.  Burks  (ed.),  Essays  on  Cellular  Automata  (Urbana:  University  of  Illinois  Press,  1970),  p.  xv. 

26  C.  G.  Langton,  ‘Artificial  Life’,  in  M.  A.  Boden  (ed.),  The  Philosophy  of  Artificial  Life  (Oxford:  Oxford 
University  Press,  1996),  47. 

27  Letter  from  von  Neumann  to  Wiener,  29  Nov.  1946  (in  the  von  Neumann  Archive  at  the  Library  of 
Congress,  Washington,  DC). 

28  H.  H.  Goldstine,  The  Computer  from  Pascal  to  von  Neumann  (Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press, 
1972),  271,  274-5. 


516  I  Jack  Copeland 


original  one?  This  is  feasible,  and  the  principle  on  which  it  can  be  based  is  closely  related 
to  Turing’s  [universal  automaton]  outlined  earlier.29 

In  lectures  von  Neumann  described  a  ‘universal  constructor’  (remarking,  ‘You 
see,  I’m  coming  quite  close  to  Turing’s  trick  with  universal  automata’).30  Just  as 
complete  descriptions  of  Turing  machines  can  be  fed  into  the  universal  automa¬ 
ton  in  the  form  of  programmes,  complete  descriptions  of  automata  can  be 
inserted  into  the  universal  constructor.  The  universal  constructor  floats  in  a 
medium — or  sea — in  which  also  float,  in  practically  unlimited  supply,  the 
components  from  which  the  universal  constructor  is  made.  Given  a  complete 
description  of  an  automaton,  the  universal  constructor  will  assemble  that 
automaton. 

If  what  is  inserted  into  the  universal  constructor  is  a  description  I  of  the 
universal  constructor  itself,  the  constructor  assembles  a  duplicate  of  itself — self¬ 
reproduction.  Since  the  duplicate  is  to  be  an  exact  copy,  it  must  contain  the 
description  I.  This  is  done  by  a  copying  mechanism  in  the  universal  constructor 
and  the  copy  of  I  is  inserted  into  the  offspring.31  Thus  the  offspring,  too,  is  capable 
of  self-reproduction.  Von  Neumann  likened  the  description  I  to  the  gene,  saying 
that  the  copying  mechanism  ‘performs  the  fundamental  act  of  reproduction,  the 
duplication  of  the  genetic  material,  which  is  clearly  the  fundamental  operation  in 
the  multiplication  of  living  cells’.32  Allowing  the  copying  mechanism  to  make 
occasional  random  errors  affords  the  possibility  of  random  mutation  in  the 
genes  of  the  offspring,  thus  opening  the  door  to  Darwinian  evolution.33 

In  his  letter  to  Wiener  (29  November  1946),  von  Neumann  voiced  some 
concerns  that  might  equally  well  be  raised  concerning  the  focus  of  modern 
research  in  A-Life  and  Artificial  Intelligence.  Von  Neumann  pointed  out  that 
when  automata  theorists  choose  the  human  nervous  system  as  their  model, 
they  are  unrealistically  selecting  ‘the  most  complicated  object  under  the  sun — 
literally’.  Moreover,  he  said,  there  is  little  advantage  in  choosing  instead  simpler 
organisms  with  fewer  neurons,  for  example,  the  ant:  any  nervous  system  exhibits 
‘exceptional  complexity’.  Von  Neumann  suggested  that  automata  theorists  ‘turn 
to  simpler  systems’,  and  he  recommended  attention  to  ‘organisms  of  the  virus  or 
bacteriophage  type’.  These,  he  pointed  out,  are  ‘self-reproductive  and . . .  are  able 
to  orient  themselves  in  an  unorganized  milieu,  to  move  towards  food,  to 
appropriate  it  and  to  use  it’.  He  estimated  that  a  typical  bacteriophage  might 
consist  of  6  million  atoms  grouped  into  a  few  hundred  thousand  ‘mechanical 
elements’,  saying  that  this  represents  ‘a  degree  of  complexity  which  is  not 

29  von  Neumann,  ‘The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata’,  315. 

30  J.  von  Neumann,  Theory  of  Self-Reproducing  Automata,  ed.  and  completed  by  A.  W.  Burks  (Urbana: 
University  of  Illinois  Press,  1966),  83. 

31  von  Neumann  ‘The  General  and  Logical  Theory  of  Automata’,  316-17. 

32  Ibid.,  317. 

33  Ibid.  317-18. 


Artificial  Life  I  517 

necessarily  beyond  human  endurance’.  By  following  this  path,  he  said,  the 
‘decisive  break’  might  be  achieved. 

6.  Letter  from  Turing  to  Young 

Shortly  before  the  Ferranti  computer  arrived  in  1951,  Turing  wrote  about  his 
work  on  morphogenesis  in  a  letter  to  the  biologist  J.  Z.  Young.  The  letter 
connects  Turing’s  work  on  morphogenesis  with  his  interest  in  neural  networks 
(Chapter  10),  and  moreover  to  some  extent  explains  why  he  did  not  follow  up 
his  earlier  suggestion  (Chapter  10,  p.  428)  and  use  the  Ferranti  computer  to 
simulate  his  ‘unorganised  machines’. 

I  am  afraid  I  am  very  far  from  the  stage  where  I  feel  inclined  to  start  asking  any 
anatomical  questions  [about  the  brain] .  According  to  my  notions  of  how  to  set  about  it 
that  will  not  occur  until  quite  a  late  stage  when  I  have  a  fairly  definite  theory  about  how 
things  are  done. 

At  present  I  am  not  working  on  the  problem  at  all,  but  on  my  mathematical  theory  of 
embryology . . .  This  is  yielding  to  treatment,  and  it  will  so  far  as  I  can  see,  give  satisfactory 
explanations  of 

i)  Gastrulation. 

ii)  Polyogonally  symmetrical  structures,  e.g.,  starfish,  flowers. 

iii)  Leaf  arrangement,  in  particular  the  way  the  Fibonacci  series  (0,  1,  1,  2,  3,  5,  8, 
13,  . . . )  comes  to  be  involved. 

iv)  Colour  patterns  on  animals,  e.g.,  stripes,  spots  and  dappling. 

v)  Patterns  on  nearly  spherical  structures  such  as  some  Radiolaria,  but  this  is  more 
difficult  and  doubtful. 

I  am  really  doing  this  now  because  it  is  yielding  more  easily  to  treatment.  I  think  it  is 
not  altogether  unconnected  with  the  other  problem.  The  brain  structure  has  to  be  one 
which  can  be  achieved  by  the  genetical  embryological  mechanism,  and  I  hope  that  this 
theory  that  I  am  now  working  on  may  make  clearer  what  restrictions  this  really  implies. 
What  you  tell  me  about  growth  of  neurons  under  stimulation  is  very  interesting  in  this 
connection.  It  suggests  means  by  which  the  neurons  might  be  made  to  grow  so  as  to  form 
a  particular  circuit,  rather  than  to  reach  a  particular  place.34 


Further  reading 

Boden,  M.  A.,  Mind  as  Machine:  A  History  of  Cognitive  Science  (Oxford:  Oxford  University 
Press,  2005). 

- (ed.),  The  Philosophy  of  Artificial  Life  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1996). 

34  Letter  from  Turing  to  Young,  8  Feb.  1951  (a  copy  of  the  letter  is  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s 
College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  K  78)). 


518  I  Jack  Copeland 


Holland,  J.  H.,  ‘Genetic  Algorithms’,  Scientific  American,  267  (July  1992),  44-50. 

Swinton,  J.,  ‘Watching  the  Daisies  Grow:  Turing  and  Fibonacci  Phyllotaxis’,  in  C.  Teuscher 
(ed.),  Alan  Turing:  Life  and  Legacy  of  a  Great  Thinker  (Berlin:  Springer- Verlag,  2004). 
Turing,  A.  M.,  Morphogenesis:  Collected  Works  of  A.  M.  Turing,  ed.  P.  T.  Saunders 
(Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1992). 

Turk,  G.,  ‘Generating  Textures  on  Arbitrary  Surfaces  Using  Reaction-Diffusion’,  Computer 
Graphics,  25  (1991),  289-98. 

von  Neumann,  J.,  Theory  of  Self-Reproducing  Automata,  ed.  and  completed  by  A.  W.  Burks 
(Urbana:  University  of  Illinois  Press,  1966).