

Lecture  on  the  Automatic 
Computing  Engine  (1947) 

Alan  Turing 


Introduction 

Jack  Copeland 

Electronics  at  Bletchley  Park 

On  8  December  1943  the  world’s  first  large-scale  special-purpose  electronic 
digital  computer — ‘Colossus’,  as  it  became  known — went  into  operation  at  the 
Government  Code  and  Cypher  School  (see  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’, 
‘Enigma’,  and  the  introduction  to  Chapter  4).  Colossus  was  built  by  Thomas  H. 
Flowers  and  his  team  of  engineers  at  the  Post  Office  Research  Station  in  Dollis 
Hill,  London.  Until  relatively  recently,  few  had  any  idea  that  electronic  digital 
computation  was  used  successfully  during  the  Second  World  War,  since  those 
who  built  and  worked  with  Colossus  were  prohibited  by  the  Official  Secrets  Act 
from  sharing  their  knowledge. 

Colossus  contained  approximately  the  same  number  of  electronic  valves 
(vacuum  tubes)  as  von  Neumann’s  IAS  computer,  built  at  the  Princeton  Institute 
of  Advanced  Study  and  dedicated  in  1952.  The  IAS  computer  was  forerunner  of 
the  IBM  701,  the  company’s  first  mass-produced  stored-programme  electronic 
computer  (1953).1  The  first  Colossus  had  1,600  electronic  valves  and  Colossus  II, 
installed  in  mid- 1944,  2,400,  while  the  IAS  computer  had  2, 600. 2 

Colossus  lacked  two  important  features  of  modern  computers.  First,  it  had  no 
internally  stored  programmes  (see  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’).  To  set  up 
Colossus  for  a  new  task,  the  operators  had  to  alter  the  machine’s  physical  wiring, 
using  plugs  and  switches.  Second,  Colossus  was  not  a  general-purpose  machine, 
being  designed  for  a  specific  cryptanalytic  task  (involving  only  logical  operations 

1  C.  C.  Hurd,  ‘Computer  Development  at  IBM’,  in  N.  Metropolis,  J.  Howlett,  and  G.  C.  Rota  (eds.),  A 
History  of  Computing  in  the  Twentieth  Century  (New  York:  Academic  Press,  1980). 

2  J.  Bigelow,  ‘Computer  Development  at  the  Institute  for  Advanced  Study’,  ibid. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  363 


and  counting).  Nevertheless,  Flowers  had  established  decisively  and  for  the  first 
time  that  large-scale  electronic  computing  machinery  was  practicable. 

The  implication  of  Flowers’s  racks  of  electronic  equipment  would  have  been 
obvious  to  Turing.  Once  Turing  had  seen  Colossus  it  was,  Flowers  said,  just  a 
matter  of  Turing’s  waiting  to  see  what  opportunity  might  arise  to  put  the  idea  of 
his  universal  computing  machine  into  practice.3 4 


Turing  Joins  the  National  Physical  Laboratory 

Precisely  such  an  opportunity  fell  into  Turing’s  lap  in  1945,  when  John  Womers- 
ley  invited  him  to  join  the  Mathematics  Division  of  the  National  Physical 
Laboratory  (NPL)  at  Teddington  in  London,  in  order  to  design  and  develop  an 
electronic  stored-programme  digital  computer — a  concrete  form  of  the  universal 
Turing  machine  of  1936.  Womersley  named  the  proposed  computer  the  Auto¬ 
matic  Computing  Engine,  or  ACE,  in  homage  to  Babbage  and  his  planned 
calculating  machines,  the  Difference  Engine  and  the  Analytical  Engine  (see 
‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’). 

The  formal  date  of  Turing’s  appointment  was  1  October  1945. 4  Womersley 
reviewed  the  events  leading  up  to  the  appointment  in  an  NPL  document  entitled 
‘A.C.E.  Project  -  Origin  and  Early  History’  (26  November  1946). 5 

1936- 37  Publication  of  paper  by  A.M.  Turing  ‘On  Computable  Numbers,  with  an 
Application  to  the  Entscheidungsproblem’.  . . . 

1937- 38  Paper  seen  by  J.R.W.  [J.  R.  Womersley]  and  read.  J.R.W.  met  C.  L.  Norfolk,  a 
telephone  engineer  who  had  specialised  in  totalisator  design  and  discussed  with  him  the 
planning  of  a  ‘Turing  machine’  using  automatic  telephone  equipment.  Rough  schemat¬ 
ics  prepared,  and  possibility  of  submitting  a  proposal  to  N.P.L.  discussed.  It  was  decided 
that  machine  would  be  too  slow  to  be  effective. 

June  1938  J.R.W.  purchased  a  uniselector  and  some  relays  on  Petty  Cash  at  R.D.  Woolwich 
for  spare-time  experiments.  Experiments  abandoned  owing  to  pressure  of  work  on 
ballistics.  . . . 

Late  1943  J.R.W.  first  heard  of  [the]  American  machines.  [Editor’s  note:  Aiken’s  Se¬ 
quence-Controlled  Calculator  at  Harvard  University  and  Stibitz’s  Relay  Computer  at 
Bell  Telephone  Laboratories — these  machines  were  neither  electronic  nor  stored- 
programme.] 

1944  Interdepartmental  Committee  on  a  Central  Mathematical  Station.  D.  R.  Hartree 
mentioned  at  one  meeting  the  possible  use  of  automatic  telephone  equipment  in  the 

3  Flowers  in  interview  with  Copeland  (July  1996}. 

4  Minutes  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory  for  23  Oct.  1945  (National 
Physical  Laboratory  library;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing 
<www.AlanTuring.net/npl_minutes_octl945>). 

5  J.  R.  Womersley,  A.C.E.  Project  -  Origin  and  Early  History’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  26  Nov.  1946 
(Public  Record  Office,  Kew,  Richmond,  Surrey  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in 
The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ace_early_history>). 


364  I  Jack  Copeland 


design  of  large  calculating  machines.  J.R.W.  submitted  suggestions  for  a  research 
programme  to  be  included  in  Committee’s  Report. 

1944  Sept.  J.R.W.  chosen  for  Maths.  Division. 

1944  Oct.  J.R.W.  prepares  research  programme  for  Maths.  Division  which  includes  an 
item  covering  the  A.C.E. 

1944  Nov.  J.R.W.  addresses  Executive  Committee  of  N.RL.  Quotation  from  M/S  (de¬ 
livered  verbatim) . . . 

‘Are  we  to  have  a  mixed  team  developing  gadgets  of  many  kinds ...  Or  are  we,  following 
Cornrie ...  to  rely  on  sheer  virtuosity  in  the  handling  of  the  ordinary  types  of  calculating 
machines?  1  think  either  attitude  would  be  disastrous . . .  We  can  gain  the  advantages  of  both 
methods  by  adopting  electronic  counting  and  by  making  the  instructions  to  the  machine 
automatic 

1945  Feb-May  J.R.W.  sent  to  the  U.S.A.  by  Director.  Sees  Harvard  machine  and  calls  it 
‘Turing  in  hardware’.  (Can  be  confirmed  by  reference  to  letters  to  wife  during  visit). 
J.R.W.  sees  ENIAC  and  is  given  information  about  EDVAC  by  Von  Neumann  and 
Goldstine. 

1945  June  J.R.W.  meets  Professor  M.  H.  A.  Newman.  Tells  Newman  he  wishes  to  meet 
Turing.  Meets  Turing  same  day  and  invites  him  home.  J.R.W.  shows  Turing  the  first 
report  on  the  EDVAC  and  persuades  him  to  join  N.P.L.  staff,  arranges  interview  and 
convinces  Director  and  Secretary. 


The  Automatic  Computing  Engine 

During  the  remainder  of  1945  Turing  drafted  his  technical  report  ‘Proposed 
Electronic  Calculator’.6  According  to  Michael  Woodger — Turing’s  assistant  at  the 
NPL  from  1946 — an  NPL  file  gave  the  date  of  Turing’s  completed  report  as  1945 
(unfortunately,  this  file  was  destroyed  in  1952). 7  Woodger  believes  that  Turing 
probably  wrote  the  report  between  October  and  December  1945.  The  report  was 
submitted  to  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  NPL  in  February  1946,  under  the 
title  ‘Proposals  for  the  Development  of  an  Automatic  Computing  Engine  (ACE)’, 
and  on  19  March  1946  the  ‘Committee  resolved  unanimously  to  support 
with  enthusiasm  the  proposal  that  Mathematics  Division  should  undertake  the 


6  Turing’s  technical  report  was  reprinted  by  the  NPL  in  April  1972  as  Computer  Science  Division  Report  No. 
57.  The  report  is  reprinted  in  full  in  B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.),  Alan  Turing’s  Automatic  Computing  Engine  (Oxford: 
Oxford  University  Press,  2004)  under  the  title  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’;  and  in  B.  E.  Carpenter  and  R.  W. 
Doran  (eds.),  AM.  Turing’s  ACE  Report  of  1946  and  Other  Papers  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  1986)  under 
the  title  ‘Proposal  for  Development  in  the  Mathematics  Division  of  an  Automatic  Computing  Engine 
(ACE)’.  A  copy  of  the  original  typewritten  report  is  in  the  Woodger  Papers  (National  Museum  of  Science 
and  Industry,  Kensington,  London  (catalogue  reference  M15/83));  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing 
Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/proposed_electronic_calculator>.  Page  refer¬ 
ences  in  what  follows  are  to  the  original  typescript. 

7  M.  Woodger,  handwritten  note,  undated  (Woodger  Papers  (catalogue  reference  M15/78));  letter  from 
Woodger  to  Copeland  (27  Nov.  1999). 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  365 


Figure  1.  The  Pilot  ACE  in  December  1950.  On  the  left  are  the  control  table  and  the 
modified  Hollerith  punched  card  unit  (on  the  table  with  contoured  legs).  The  tray  slung 
below  the  main  frame  contains  the  short  delay  lines  used  for  temporary  storage. 

Source:  Crown  copyright.  Reproduced  by  permission  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory. 

development  and  construction  of  an  automatic  computing  engine  of  the  type 
proposed  by  Dr.  A.  M.  Turing’.8 

Turing’s  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’  gave  the  first  relatively  complete 
specification  of  an  electronic  stored-programme  digital  computer.  The  earlier 
‘First  Draft  of  a  Report  on  the  EDVAC’,  written  by  von  Neumann  in  the  USA  in 
about  May  1945  (see  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’),  contained  little  engineer¬ 
ing  detail,  in  particular  concerning  electronic  hardware.  Harry  Huskey,  the  elec¬ 
tronic  engineer  who  subsequently  drew  up  the  first  detailed  specifications  of 
possible  hardware  configurations  for  the  EDVAC,  has  stated  that  the  ‘information 
in  the  “First  Draft”  was  of  no  help  in  this’  and  that  ‘von  Neumann’s  “First  Draft” 
provided  no  technical  contribution  to  the  development  of  computers’.9  Turing’s 
proposal,  on  the  other  hand,  supplied  detailed  specifications  of  hardware  units, 
including  circuit  designs,  and  specimen  programmes  in  machine  code.  Turing 
even  gave  an  exact  estimate  of  the  cost  of  building  the  machine  (£1 1,200). 

8  Minutes  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory  for  19  Mar.  1946  (National 
Physical  Laboratory  library;  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing 
<www.AlanTuring.net/npl_minutes_mar  1 946 > ) . 

9  Letter  from  Huskey  to  Copeland  (4  Feb.  2002). 


366  I  Jack  Copeland 


Turing’s  ACE  and  the  ED  VAC  (which  was  not  fully  working  until  195210) 
differed  fundamentally  in  design.  The  EDVAC  had  what  is  now  called  a  central 
processing  unit  or  cpu,  whereas  in  the  ACE  different  memory  locations  had 
specific  logical  or  numerical  functions  associated  with  them.  For  example,  if  two 
numbers  were  transferred  to  a  certain  destination  in  memory  their  sum  would  be 
formed  there,  ready  to  be  transferred  elsewhere  by  a  subsequent  instruction. 
Programmes  for  the  ACE  were  made  up  entirely  of  instructions  such  as  ‘Transfer 
the  contents  of  Temporary  Store  27  to  Temporary  Store  6’.  Instead  of  writing 
mathematically  significant  instructions  like 

MULTIPLY  x  BY  y  AND  STORE  THE  RESULT  IN  z 

the  programmer  composed  a  series  of  transfer  instructions  producing  that  effect. 

Turing  saw  that  size  of  memory  and  speed  were  the  keys  to  computing.  (His 
assistant  at  the  NPL,  lames  Wilkinson,  observed  that  Turing  ‘was  obsessed  with 
the  idea  of  speed  on  the  machine’.11)  Turing’s  design  specified  a  high-speed 
memory  of  roughly  the  same  capacity  as  an  early  Macintosh  computer — enor¬ 
mous  by  the  standards  of  his  day.  In  order  to  increase  the  speed  of  a  programme’s 
execution,  he  proposed  that  instructions  be  stored,  not  consecutively,  but  at 
carefully  chosen  positions  in  memory,  with  each  instruction  containing  a  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  position  of  the  next.  Also  with  a  view  to  speed,  he  included  a  small 
fast-access  memory  for  the  temporary  storage  of  whichever  numbers  were  used 
most  frequently  at  a  given  stage  of  a  computation.  According  to  Wilkinson  in 
1955,  Turing  ‘was  the  first  to  realise  that  it  was  possible  to  overcome  access  time 
difficulties  with . . .  mercury  lines ...  or  drum  stores  by  providing  a  comparatively 
small  amount  of  fast  access  store.  Many  of  the  commercial  machines  in  the  USA 
and ...  in  this  country  make  great  use  of  this  principle.’12 

Turing’s  philosophy — very  different  from  that  embraced  in  the  EDVAC — was 
to  dispense  with  additional  hardware  in  favour  of  software:  in  his  design, 
complex  behaviour  was  to  be  achieved  by  complex  programming  rather  than 
by  complex  equipment  (such  as  a  hardware  multiplier  and  divider,  and  special 
hardware  for  floating-point  arithmetic).  The  ACE  therefore  had  much  in 
common  with  today’s  RISC  (Reduced  Instruction  Set  Computing)  architectures. 
Turing  spoke  disparagingly  of  the  contrary  ‘American  tradition  of  solving  one’s 
difficulties  by  means  of  much  equipment  rather  than  thought’.13 


10  H.  Huskey,  ‘The  Development  of  Automatic  Computing’,  in  Proceedings  of  the  First  USA-JAPAN 
Computer  Conference ,  Tokyo  (1972),  698-704  (702). 

11  Wilkinson  in  interview  with  Christopher  Evans  in  1976  (‘The  Pioneers  of  Computing:  An  Oral  History 
of  Computing’  (London:  Science  Museum)). 

12  Letter  from  Wilkinson  to  Newman,  10  June  1955  (Turing  Papers,  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s 
College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  A  7)).  Quoted  by  permission  of  Heather  Wilkinson. 

13  Memo  from  Turing  to  Womersley,  n.d.  but  c.  Dec.  1946  (Woodger  Papers  (catalogue  reference  M15/ 
77);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
turing_womersley_cdec46  > ) . 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  367 


Had  Turing’s  ACE  been  built  as  he  planned,  it  would  have  been  in  a  different 
league  from  the  other  early  computers.  However,  from  early  1947 — for  reasons 
that  Turing  might  have  regarded  as  amounting  to  ‘cowardly  and  irrational 
doubts’14 — his  colleagues  in  the  ACE  Section  were  in  favour  of  devoting  their 
efforts  to  building  a  much  scaled-down  and  simplified  form  of  Turing’s  design, 
which  they  called  the  ‘Test  Assembly’,  rather  than  pressing  on  ahead  immediately 
with  the  full-scale  ACE.  It  was  not  in  Turing’s  nature  to  direct  them  otherwise. 
He  ‘tended  to  ignore  the  Test  Assembly’,  simply  ‘standing  to  one  side’  (Wilkinson 
said).15  Finally,  in  1948,  a  disenchanted  Turing  left  the  NPL  for  Newman’s 
Computing  Machine  Laboratory  at  Manchester  University.  The  introduction  to 
the  next  chapter  tells  the  full  story  of  the  frustrating  delays  at  the  NPL  and  of 
Turing’s  move  to  Manchester  (and  see  also  the  introduction  to  Chapter  4). 

It  was  not  until  May  1950  that  a  small  ‘pilot  model’  of  the  Automatic 
Computing  Engine,  built  by  Wilkinson,  David  Clayden,  Donald  Davies,  Edward 
Newman,  Michael  Woodger,  and  others,  executed  its  first  programme.  With  an 
operating  speed  of  1  MHz,  the  Pilot  Model  ACE  was  for  some  time  the  fastest 
computer  in  the  world.  However,  years  of  delays  beyond  Turing’s  control  had 
cost  the  NPL  the  race  to  build  the  world’s  first  stored-programme  electronic 
digital  computer — an  honour  that  went  to  the  University  of  Manchester,  where, 
in  Newman’s  Computing  Machine  Laboratory,  the  ‘Manchester  Baby’  ran  its  first 
programme  on  21  June  1948. 16  (As  its  name  implies,  the  Baby  was  a  very 
small  computer,  and  the  news  that  it  had  run  what  was  only  a  tiny  pro¬ 
gramme — just  seventeen  instructions  long — for  a  mathematically  trivial  task 
was  ‘greeted  with  hilarity’  by  the  NPL  team  developing  the  much  more  sophisti¬ 
cated  Pilot  Model  ACE.17)  Turing’s  influence  on  the  Manchester  computer  is 
described  below. 

The  EDSAC  computer,  built  by  Maurice  Wilkes  at  Cambridge  University, 
became  operational  in  1949  and  was  the  second  stored-programme  electronic 
computer  to  run.  The  Pilot  Model  ACE  was  also  preceded  by  the  BINAC  (1949), 
built  by  Eckert  and  Mauchly  at  their  Electronic  Control  Company,  Philadelphia 
(although  opinions  differ  over  whether  the  BINAC  ever  actually  worked),  the 
CSIR  Mark  1  (1949),  built  by  Trevor  Pearcey  at  the  Commonwealth  Scientific 
and  Industrial  Research  Organization,  Division  of  Radiophysics,  Sydney,  Austra¬ 
lia,  the  Whirlwind  I  (1949),  built  by  Jay  Forrester  at  the  Digital  Computer 
Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  and  the  SEAC  (1950),  built 


14  Turing  used  this  phrase  in  a  different  connection  on  p.  42  of  his  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’. 

15  Wilkinson  in  interview  with  Evans  (see  n.  11). 

16  Williams  described  the  Computing  Machine  Laboratory  on  p.  328  of  his  ‘Early  Computers  at 
Manchester  University’  ( Radio  and  Electronic  Engineer,  45  (1975),  327-31):  ‘It  was  one  room  in  a  Victorian 
building  whose  architectural  features  are  best  described  as  “late  lavatorial”.  The  walls  were  of  brown  glazed 
brick  and  the  door  was  labelled  “Magnetism  Room’.” 

17  Woodger  in  interview  with  Copeland  (June  1998). 


368  I  Jack  Copeland 


by  Samuel  Alexander  and  Ralph  Slutz  at  the  US  Bureau  of  Standards  Eastern 
Division,  Washington,  DC.  Huskey’s  SWAC,  built  at  the  US  Bureau  of  Standards 
Western  Division,  Los  Angeles,  ran  a  few  months  after  the  Pilot  Model  ACE  (in 
August  1950). 


Derivatives  of  Turing’s  ACE  Design 

The  DEUCE,  the  production  version  of  the  Pilot  Model  ACE,  was  built  by  the 
English  Electric  Company.  The  first  was  delivered  in  March  1955  (to  the  NPL) 
and  the  last  went  out  of  service  around  1970. 18  Sales  of  this  large  and  expensive 
machine  exceeded  thirty,  confounding  the  suggestion,  made  in  1946  by  Sir 
Charles  Darwin,  Director  of  the  NPL,  that  ‘it  is  very  possible  that . . .  one  machine 
would  suffice  to  solve  all  the  problems  that  are  demanded  of  it  from  the  whole 
country’.19  (Douglas  Hartee,  a  leading  British  expert  on  automatic  computation, 
thought  that  a  total  of  three  digital  computers  would  probably  be  adequate  for 
the  country’s  computing  needs.20)  The  NPL’s  DEUCE  replaced  the  Pilot  Model 
ACE,  and  in  1956  much  of  the  Pilot  Model  was  transferred  to  the  London 
Science  Museum  (where  it  is  on  permanent  display).21 

Work  began  on  a  large-scale  ACE  in  the  autumn  of  1954.22  Built  and  housed  at 
the  NPL,  the  ‘Big  ACE’  was  in  operation  by  late  1958.  Wilkinson,  Clayden,  Davies, 
(Ted)  Newman,  and  Woodger  all  contributed  to  the  final  design.23  The  Big  ACE 
filled  a  room  the  size  of  an  auditorium.24  It  remained  in  service  until  1967. 

At  the  Press  Day  held  in  1958  to  announce  the  inauguration  of  the  Big  ACE, 
A.  M.  Uttley — Superintendent  of  the  NPL’s  Control  Mechanisms  and  Electronics 


18  Letter  from  J.  Illingworth  to  Fryer,  6  Nov.  1956  (Woodger  Papers  (catalogue  reference  M15/87);  a 
digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/illingworth_ 
fryer_6nov56  > ) . 

19  C.  Darwin,  Automatic  Computing  Engine  (ACE)’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  17  Apr.  1946  (Public 
Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/385);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History 
of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/darwin_ace>). 

20  Hartree’s  opinion  is  quoted  in  V.  Bowden,  ‘The  25th  Anniversary  of  the  Stored  Program  Computer’, 
Radio  and  Electronic  Engineer,  45  (1975),  326. 

21  Memorandum  from  Hiscocks  to  the  DSIR,  30  Jan.  1956  (Public  Record  Office  (document  reference 
DSIR  10/275);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTur- 
ing.net/hiscocks_dsir_30janl956>);  letter  from  D.  Brunt  to  Sir  Charles  Darwin  (20  July  1956)  (Public 
Record  Office  (document  reference  DSIR  10/275);  <www.AlanTuring.net/brunt_darwin_20july56>);  ‘Dis¬ 
posal  of  Pilot  ACE’,  memorandum  from  Hiscocks  to  the  DSIR,  26  July  1956  (Public  Record  Office 
(document  reference  DSIR  10/275);  <www.AlanTuring.net/hiscocks_disposal_pilot_ace>). 

22  Letter  from  Illingworth  to  Fryer  (see  n.  18). 

23  Letter  from  A.  M.  Uttley  to  Sara  Turing,  19  Dec.  1958  (in  the  Turing  Papers,  the  Modern  Archive 
Centre,  King’s  College,  Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  A  11) ). 

24  F.  M.  Blake,  D.  O.  Clayden,  D.  W.  Davies,  L.  J.  Page,  and  J.  B.  Stringer,  ‘Some  Features  of  the  ACE 
Computer’,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  8  May  1957  (Woodger  Papers  (catalogue  reference  N12/102);  a 
digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ace_ 
features>). 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  369 


Division — announced:  ‘Today,  Turing’s  dream  has  come  true.’25  If  so,  it  was  a 
dream  whose  time  had  passed.  Technology  had  moved  ahead  in  the  thirteen  years 
since  Turing  wrote  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’.  The  Big  ACE  was  not  the 
revolutionary  machine  that  it  would  have  been  if  completed  six  or  seven  years 
earlier.  Not  only  did  the  Big  ACE  use  valves  in  the  era  of  the  transistor;  the 
designers  also  retained  the  by  then  outmoded  mercury  delay  line  memory 
proposed  by  Turing  in  1945  (see  below).26 

Nevertheless,  the  Big  ACE  was  a  fast  machine  with  a  large  memory,  and  the 
decision  to  stick  with  the  principles  used  in  the  Pilot  ACE  and  the  DEUCE  was 
reasonable  in  the  circumstances.  In  1953  Francis  Colebrook  (Head  of  the  Elec¬ 
tronics  Section  responsible  for  building  Pilot  ACE)  urged  that  the  proposed 
large-scale  ACE  should  ‘be  based  on  well  proved  components  and  techniques, 
even  when  revolutionary  developments  seem  to  be  just  around  the  corner. 
Otherwise  the  [Mathematics]  Division  will  get  nothing  but  a  succession  of 
pilot  models.’27 

The  Big  ACE  ran  at  1.5  MHz,  50  per  cent  faster  than  the  Pilot  ACE  and  the 
DEUCE,  both  1  MHz  machines.  A  1957  report  stated  that  the  Big  ACE  ‘appears 
in  fact  to  be  about  as  fast  as  present-day  parallel  core-store  computers’.28  ‘Core¬ 
store’  or  magnetic  core  memory  was  the  most  advanced  high-speed  storage 
medium  at  that  time. 

The  basic  principles  of  Turing’s  ACE  design  were  used  in  the  G15  computer, 
built  and  marketed  by  the  Detroit-based  Bendix  Corporation.29  The  G15  was 
designed  by  Huskey,  who  had  spent  the  year  1947  at  the  NPL  working  in  the  ACE 
Section.  The  first  G15  ran  in  1954. 30  It  was  arguably  the  first  personal  computer. 
By  following  Turing’s  philosophy  of  minimizing  hardware  in  favour  of  software, 
Huskey  was  able  to  make  the  G15  small  enough  (it  was  the  size  of  a  large 
domestic  refrigerator)  and  cheap  enough  to  be  marketed  as  a  single-user  com¬ 
puter.  Yet  thanks  to  the  design  of  the  ACE-like  memory  (implemented  in  a 
magnetic  drum),  the  G15  was  as  fast  as  computers  many  times  its  size.  Over 
400  were  sold  worldwide  and  the  G15  remained  in  use  until  about  1970. 

Another  computer  deriving  from  Turing’s  ACE  design,  the  MOSAIC  or  Ministry 
of  Supply  Automatic  Integrator  and  Computer,  played  a  role  in  Britain’s  air 
defences  during  the  Cold  War  period.  In  1946  Flowers  established  a  small  team  at 
the  Post  Office  Research  Station  to  build  a  computer  to  Turing’s  logical  design  (see 
the  introduction  to  the  next  chapter) .  The  team  consisted  of  two  engineers,  William 

25  Letter  from  Uttley  to  Sara  Turing  (see  n.  23). 

26  An  experimental  transistorized  machine  went  into  operation  at  Manchester  University  in  1953;  see 
S.  H.  Lavington,  Early  British  Computers  (Manchester:  Manchester  University  Press,  1980). 

27  F.  M.  Colebrook,  4  May  1953;  quoted  in  D.  M.  Yates,  Turing’s  Legacy:  A  History  of  Computing  at  the 
National  Physical  Laboratory  1945-1995  (London:  Science  Museum,  1997),  67. 

28  Blake,  Clayden,  Davies,  Page,  and  Stringer,  ‘Some  Features  of  the  ACE  Computer’,  3. 

29  Huskey  in  interview  with  Copeland  (Feb.  1998). 

30  Letter  from  Huskey  to  Copeland  (20  Dec.  2001). 


370  I  Jack  Copeland 


Chandler  and  Allen  Coombs,  both  of  whom  had  assisted  Flowers  in  the  construc¬ 
tion  of  Colossus.  Working  alone,  Coombs  and  Chandler  carried  out  the  enginee¬ 
ring  design  of  the  MOSAIC,  a  large  computer  based  on  Turing’s  Version  VII  of  the 
ACE  design  (Version  VII  dated  from  1946). 31  Of  the  various  ACE-type  computers 
that  were  built,  the  MOSAIC  was  the  closest  to  Turing’s  original  conception. 

The  MOSAIC  consisted  of  some  70  mercury  delay  lines,  2,000  semi-conductors 
(germanium  diodes),  and  7,000  thermionic  valves.32  It  first  ran  a  programme  in 
1952  or  early  195  3. 33  Once  completed,  the  MOSAIC  was  installed  at  the  Radar 
Research  and  Development  Establishment  (RRDE)  in  Malvern.  It  was  used  to 
calculate  aircraft  trajectories  from  radar  data  in  connection  with  anti-aircraft 
measures  (the  details  appear  still  to  be  classified).  The  data  was  generated  by 
two  mobile  data-recorders  working  in  conjunction  with  a  radar  tracking  system.34 

Coombs  has  emphasized:  ‘it  was  just  Chandler  and  I — we  designed  every  scrap 
of  that  machine.’35  Given,  therefore,  that  two  engineers  working  alone  succeeded 
in  completing  the  large  MOSAIC,  there  seems  little  doubt  that,  had  the  NPL 
possessed  the  organizational  capability  and  sufficient  manpower,  a  computer  not 
too  distant  from  Turing’s  original  conception  could  have  been  up  and  running  by 
the  early  1950s.  Thanks  to  their  experience  with  Colossus,  Chandler  and  Coombs 
had  a  substantial  start  on  everyone  else  in  the  field.  Turing  was  unable  to  share 
his  knowledge  of  their  wartime  work  with  Darwin.  Had  he  been  able  to  do  so,  the 
NPL  might  have  acted  to  boost  the  resources  available  to  Chandler  and  Coombs, 
and  so  made  Turing’s  dream  a  reality  much  sooner. 

Other  derivatives  of  the  ACE  included  the  EMI  Business  Machine  and  the 
Packard-Bell  PB250.36  Designed  for  business  applications  involving  the  shallow 
processing  of  large  quantities  of  data,  the  EMI  Business  Machine  was  a  relatively 


31  Coombs  in  interview  with  Evans  in  1976  (‘The  Pioneers  of  Computing:  An  Oral  History  of  Comput¬ 
ing’  (London:  Science  Museum));  A.  W.  M.  Coombs,  ‘MOSAIC’,  in  Automatic  Digital  Computation: 
Proceedings  of  a  Symposium  Held  at  the  National  Physical  Laboratory  (London:  Her  Majesty’s  Stationery 
Office,  1954);  B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.)>  ‘The  Turing-Wilkinson  Lectures  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine’, 
in  K.  Lurukawa,  D.  Michie,  and  S.  Muggleton  (eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  15  (Oxford:  Oxford  University 
Press,  1999).  Digital  facsimiles  of  a  series  of  technical  reports  concerning  the  MOSAIC  by  Coombs, 
Chandler,  and  others  are  available  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTur- 
ing.net/mosaic>. 

32  ‘Engineer-in-Chief’s  Report  on  the  Work  of  the  Engineering  Department  for  the  Year  1  April  1954  to 
31  March  1955’,  Post  Office  Engineering  Department  (The  Post  Office  Archive,  London);  Coombs, 
‘MOSAIC’. 

33  ‘Engineer-in-Chief’s  Report  on  the  Work  of  the  Engineering  Department  for  the  Year  1  April  1952  to 
31  March  1953’,  Post  Office  Engineering  Department  (The  Post  Office  Archive,  London). 

34  ‘Engineer-in-Chief’s  Report  on  the  Work  of  the  Engineering  Department  for  the  Year  1  April  1951  to 
31  March  1952’,  Post  Office  Engineering  Department  (The  Post  Office  Archive,  London). 

35  Coombs  in  interview  with  Evans  (see  n.  31). 

36  C.  G.  Bell,  and  A.  Newell,  Computer  Structures:  Readings  and  Examples  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill, 
1971),  44,  74;  R.  J.  Froggatt,  ‘Logical  Design  of  a  Computer  for  Business  Use’,  Journal  of  the  British  Institution 
of  Radio  Engineers,  17  (1957),  681-96;  Yates,  Turing’s  Legacy:  A  History  of  Computing  at  the  National  Physical 
Laboratory  1945-1995,  43-4. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  371 

slow  electronic  computer  with  a  large  memory.  The  PB250  was  a  low-cost 
transistorized  computer. 


Turing,  Newman,  and  the  Manchester  Computer 

At  the  time  of  the  Manchester  Baby  and  its  successor,  the  Manchester  Mark  I,  the 
electronic  engineers  Frederic  Williams  and  Thomas  Kilburn,  who  had  translated 
the  logico -mathematical  idea  of  the  stored-programme  computer  into  hardware, 
were  given  too  little  credit  by  the  mathematicians  at  Manchester — Williams  and 
Kilburn  were  regarded  as  excellent  engineers  but  not  as  ‘ideas  men’.37  Nowadays 
the  tables  have  turned  too  far  and  the  triumph  at  Manchester  is  usually  credited 
to  Williams  and  Kilburn  alone.  Fortunately  the  words  of  the  late  Williams 
survive  to  set  the  record  straight: 

Now  let’s  be  clear  before  we  go  any  further  that  neither  Tom  Kilburn  nor  I  knew  the  first 
thing  about  computers  when  we  arrived  in  Manchester  University. . .  Newman  explained 
the  whole  business  of  how  a  computer  works  to  us.38 

Tom  Kilburn  and  I  knew  nothing  about  computers . . .  Professor  Newman  and  Mr  A.  M. 
Turing . . .  knew  a  lot  about  computers . . .  They  took  us  by  the  hand  and  explained  how 
numbers  could  live  in  houses  with  addresses ... 39 

In  an  address  to  the  Royal  Society  on  4  March  1948,  Newman  presented  this 
very  explanation: 

In  modern  times  the  idea  of  a  universal  calculating  machine  was  independently  [of 
Babbage]  introduced  by  Turing . . .  There  is  provision  for  storing  numbers,  say  in  the 
scale  of  2,  so  that  each  number  appears  as  a  row  of,  say,  forty  0’s  and  l’s  in  certain  places  or 
‘houses’  in  the  machine.  . . .  Certain  of  these  numbers,  or  ‘words’  are  read,  one  after 
another,  as  orders.  In  one  possible  type  of  machine  an  order  consists  of  four  numbers,  for 
example  11,  13,  27,  4.  The  number  4  signifies  ‘add’,  and  when  control  shifts  to  this  word 
the  ‘houses’  Hll  and  H13  will  be  connected  to  the  adder  as  inputs,  and  H27  as  output. 
The  numbers  stored  in  Hll  and  H13  pass  through  the  adder,  are  added,  and  the  sum  is 
passed  on  to  H27.  The  control  then  shifts  to  the  next  order.  In  most  real  machines  the 
process  just  described  would  be  done  by  three  separate  orders,  the  first  bringing  <H11> 
(=  content  of  Hll)  to  a  central  accumulator,  the  second  adding  <H13>  into  the 
accumulator,  and  the  third  sending  the  result  to  H27;  thus  only  one  address  would  be 
required  in  each  order.  ...  A  machine  with  storage,  with  this  automatic-telephone- 
exchange  arrangement  and  with  the  necessary  adders,  subtractors  and  so  on,  is,  in  a 
sense,  already  a  universal  machine.40 

37  Peter  Hilton  in  interview  with  Copeland  (June  2001). 

38  Williams  in  interview  with  Evans  in  1976  (‘The  Pioneers  of  Computing:  An  Oral  History  of  Comput¬ 
ing’  (London:  Science  Museum)). 

39  Williams,  ‘Early  Computers  at  Manchester  University’,  328. 

40  M.  H.  A.  Newman,  ‘General  Principles  of  the  Design  of  All-Purpose  Computing  Machines’,  Proceedings 
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  Series  A,  195  (1948),  271-74  (271-2). 


372  I  Jack  Copeland 


Following  this  explanation  of  Turing’s  three-address  concept  (source  1,  source  2, 
destination,  function)  Newman  went  on  to  describe  programme  storage  (‘the 
orders  shall  be  in  a  series  of  houses  XI,  X2, . . .’)  and  conditional  branching.  He 
then  summed  up: 

From  this  highly  simplified  account  it  emerges  that  the  essential  internal  parts  of  the 
machine  are,  first,  a  storage  for  numbers  (which  may  also  be  orders).  . . .  Secondly, 
adders,  multipliers,  etc.  Thirdly,  an  ‘automatic  telephone  exchange’  for  selecting  ‘houses’, 
connecting  them  to  the  arithmetic  organ,  and  writing  the  answers  in  other  prescribed 
houses.  Finally,  means  of  moving  control  at  any  stage  to  any  chosen  order,  if  a  certain 
condition  is  satisfied,  otherwise  passing  to  the  next  order  in  the  normal  sequence.  Besides 
these  there  must  be  ways  of  setting  up  the  machine  at  the  outset,  and  extracting  the  final 
answer  in  useable  form.41 

In  a  letter  written  in  1972  Williams  described  in  some  detail  what  he  and 
Kilburn  were  told  by  Newman: 

About  the  middle  of  the  year  [1946]  the  possibility  of  an  appointment  at  Manchester 
University  arose  and  I  had  a  talk  with  Professor  Newman  who  was  already  interested  in  the 
possibility  of  developing  computers  and  had  acquired  a  grant  from  the  Royal  Society  of 
£30,000  for  this  purpose.  Since  he  understood  computers  and  I  understood  electronics 
the  possibilities  of  fruitful  collaboration  were  obvious.  I  remember  Newman  giving  us  a  few 
lectures  in  which  he  outlined  the  organisation  of  a  computer  in  terms  of  numbers  being 
identified  by  the  address  of  the  house  in  which  they  were  placed  and  in  terms  of  numbers 
being  transferred  from  this  address,  one  at  a  time,  to  an  accumulator  where  each  entering 
number  was  added  to  what  was  already  there.  At  any  time  the  number  in  the  accumulator 
could  be  transferred  back  to  an  assigned  address  in  the  store  and  the  accumulator  cleared  for 
further  use.  The  transfers  were  to  be  effected  by  a  stored  program  in  which  a  list  of 
instructions  was  obeyed  sequentially.  Ordered  progress  through  the  list  could  be  inter¬ 
rupted  by  a  test  instruction  which  examined  the  sign  of  the  number  in  the  accumulator. 
Thereafter  operation  started  from  a  new  point  in  the  list  of  instructions.  This  was  the  first 
information  I  received  about  the  organisation  of  computers.  . . .  Our  first  computer  was  the 
simplest  embodiment  of  these  principles,  with  the  sole  difference  that  it  used  a  subtracting 
rather  than  an  adding  accumulator.42 

Turing’s  early  input  to  the  developments  at  Manchester,  hinted  at  by  Williams 
in  his  above-quoted  reference  to  Turing,  may  have  been  via  the  lectures  on 
computer  design  that  Turing  and  Wilkinson  gave  in  London  during  the  period 
December  1946  to  February  1947.43  The  lectures  were  attended  by  representa¬ 
tives  of  various  organizations  planning  to  use  or  build  an  electronic  computer. 


41  M.  H.  A.  Newman,  ‘General  Principles  of  the  Design  of  All-Purpose  Computing  Machines’,  Proceedings 
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  Series  A,  195  (1948),  271-74  (271-2). 

42  Letter  from  Williams  to  Randell,  1972  (quoted  in  B.  Randell,  ‘On  Alan  Turing  and  the  Origins  of 
Digital  Computers’,  in  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  7  (Edinburgh:  Edinburgh 
University  Press,  1972),  9). 

43  ‘The  Turing-Wilkinson  Lectures  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine’. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  373 


Kilburn  was  in  the  audience.44  (Kilburn  usually  said,  when  asked  where  he 
obtained  his  basic  knowledge  of  the  computer  from,  that  he  could  not  remem¬ 
ber;45  for  example,  in  a  1992  interview  he  said:  ‘Between  early  1945  and  early 
1947,  in  that  period,  somehow  or  other  I  knew  what  a  digital  computer  was . . . 
Where  I  got  this  knowledge  from  I’ve  no  idea.’46) 

Whatever  role  Turing’s  lectures  may  have  played  in  informing  Kilburn,  there  is 
little  doubt  that  credit  for  the  Manchester  computer — called  the  ‘Newman- 
Williams  machine’  by  Huskey  in  a  report  written  shortly  after  a  visit  in  1947  to 
the  Manchester  project47 — belongs  not  only  to  Williams  and  Kilburn  but  also  to 
Newman,  and  that  the  influence  on  Newman  of  Turing’s  ‘On  Computable 
Numbers’  was  crucial,  as  was  the  influence  of  Flowers’s  Colossus  (see  the 
introduction  to  Chapter  4). 

There  is  more  information  concerning  Turing  and  the  Manchester  computer 
in  the  chapter  ‘Artificial  Life’. 

The  Manchester  computer  and  the  EDVAC 

The  Baby  and  the  Manchester  Mark  I  are  sometimes  said  to  have  descended 
from  the  EDVAC.  Newman  was  well  aware  of  von  Neumann’s  ‘First  Draff 
of  a  Report  on  the  EDVAC’.  In  the  summer  of  1946  he  sent  David  Rees,  a 
lecturer  in  his  department  at  Manchester  and  an  ex-member  of  the  Newmanry, 
to  a  series  of  lectures  at  the  Moore  School,  where  Eckert,  Mauchly,  and  other 
members  of  the  ENIAC-EDVAC  group  publicized  their  ideas  on  computer 
design.48  In  the  autumn  of  1946  Newman  himself  went  to  Princeton  for  three 
months.49 

Newman’s  advocacy  of  ‘a  central  accumulator’ — a  characteristic  feature  of 
the  EDVAC  but  not  of  the  ACE — was  probably  influenced  by  his  knowledge 
of  the  American  proposals.  However,  von  Neumann’s  ideas  seem  to  have  had 
little  influence  on  other  members  of  the  Manchester  project.  Kilburn  spoke 
scathingly  of  the  von  Neumann  ‘dictat’.50  Geoffrey  Tootill  said: 

Williams,  Kilburn  and  I  (the  three  designers  of  the  first  Manchester  machine)  had  all  spent 
the  1939-1945  war  at  the  Telecommunications  Research  Establishment  doing  R  &  D  on 
radiolocation  equipments.  The  main  U.S.  ideas  that  we  accepted  in  return  for  our 


44  G.  Bowker  and  R.  Giordano,  ‘Interview  with  Tom  Kilburn’,  Annals  of  the  History  of  Computing,  15 
(1993),  17-32. 

45  Letter  from  Brian  Napper  to  Copeland  (16  June  2002). 

46  Bowker  and  Giordano,  ‘Interview  with  Tom  Kilburn)  19. 

47  H.  D.  Huskey,  untitled  typescript,  National  Physical  Laboratory,  n.d.  but  c.  Mar.  1947  (Woodger 
Papers  (catalogue  reference  Ml 2/ 105);  a  digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of 
Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/huskey_1947>). 

48  Letter  from  Rees  to  Copeland  (2  Apr.  2001). 

49  W.  Newman,  ‘Max  Newman:  Mathematician,  Codebreaker  and  Computer  Pioneer)  to  appear  in 
B.  J.  Copeland  (ed.)  Colossus:  The  First  Electronic  Computer  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press). 

50  Kilburn  in  interview  with  Copeland  (July  1997). 


374  I  Jack  Copeland 


initiatives  on  these  and  later  on  computers  were  the  terms  ‘radar’  and  ‘memory’. .  .We 
disliked  the  latter  term,  incidentally,  as  encouraging  the  anthropomorphic  concept  of 
‘machines  that  think’.51 

To  the  best  of  my  recollection  FC  [Williams] ,  Tom  [Kilburn]  and  I  never  discussed . . .  von 
Neumann’s . . .  ideas  during  the  development  of  the  Small-Scale  Experimental  Machine 
[the  Baby],  nor  did  I  have  any  knowledge  of  them  when  I  designed  the  Ferranti  Mk  I.  I 
don’t  think  FC  was  influenced  at  all  by  von  Neumann,  because  I  think  he  was  in  general 
quite  punctilious  in  acknowledging  other  people’s  ideas.52 

Tootill  added: 

As  well  as  our  own  ideas,  we  incorporated  functions  suggested  by  Turing  and  Newman  in 
the  improvement  and  extension  of  the  first  machine.  When  I  did  the  logic  design  of  the 
Ferranti  Mark  1, 1  got  them  to  approve  the  list  of  functions.53 


The  ACE  and  Artificial  Intelligence54 

In  designing  the  ACE,  Artificial  Intelligence  was  not  far  from  Turing’s  thoughts 
— he  described  himself  as  building  ‘a  brain’.55  The  otherwise  austere  ‘Proposed 
Electronic  Calculator’  contains  a  cameo  discussion  of  computer  intelligence  and 
chess  (Turing’s  earliest  surviving  remarks  concerning  AI): 

‘Can  the  machine  play  chess?’  It  could  fairly  easily  be  made  to  play  a  rather  bad  game.  It 
would  be  bad  because  chess  requires  intelligence.  We  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this  section 
that  the  machine  should  be  treated  as  entirely  without  intelligence.  There  are  indications 
however  that  it  is  possible  to  make  the  machine  display  intelligence  at  the  risk  of  its 
making  occasional  serious  mistakes.  By  following  up  this  aspect  the  machine  could 
probably  be  made  to  play  very  good  chess.56 

What  is  probably  Turing’s  earliest  mention  to  survive  of  his  interest  in  neural 
simulation  (see  further  Chapter  10)  occurs  in  a  letter  to  the  cyberneticist  W.  Ross 
Ashby: 

In  working  on  the  ACE  I  am  more  interested  in  the  possibility  of  producing  models  of 
the  action  of  the  brain  than  in  the  practical  applications  to  computing.  . . .  The  ACE  will 
be  used,  as  you  suggest,  in  the  first  instance  in  an  entirely  disciplined  manner,  similar  to 
the  action  of  the  lower  centres,  although  the  reflexes  will  be  extremely  complicated.  The 
disciplined  action  carries  with  it  the  disagreeable  feature,  which  you  mentioned,  that  it 
will  be  entirely  uncritical  when  anything  goes  wrong.  It  will  also  be  necessarily  devoid  of 

51  Letter  from  Tootill  to  Copeland  (18  Apr.  2001). 

52  Letter  from  Tootill  to  Copeland  (16  May  2001). 

53  Letter  from  Tootill  to  Copeland  (18  Apr.  2001). 

54  As  explained  in  the  chapter  Artificial  Intelligence’,  the  term  Artificial  Intelligence’  did  not  come  into 
use  until  after  Turing’s  death. 

55  Don  Bayley  in  interview  with  Copeland  (Dec.  1997). 

56  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’,  16. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  375 


anything  that  could  be  called  originality.  There  is,  however,  no  reason  why  the  machine 
should  always  be  used  in  such  a  manner:  there  is  nothing  in  its  construction  which  obliges 
us  to  do  so.  It  would  be  quite  possible  for  the  machine  to  try  out  variations  of  behaviour 
and  accept  or  reject  them  in  the  manner  you  describe  and  I  have  been  hoping  to  make  the 
machine  do  this.  This  is  possible  because,  without  altering  the  design  of  the  machine  itself, 
it  can,  in  theory  at  any  rate,  be  used  as  a  model  of  any  other  machine,  by  making  it 
remember  a  suitable  set  of  instructions.  The  ACE  is  in  fact  analogous  to  the  ‘universal 
machine’  described  in  my  paper  on  computable  numbers.  This  theoretical  possibility  is 
attainable  in  practice,  in  all  reasonable  cases,  at  worst  at  the  expense  of  operating  slightly 
slower  than  a  machine  specially  designed  for  the  purpose  in  question.  Thus,  although  the 
brain  may  in  fact  operate  by  changing  its  neuron  circuits  by  the  growth  of  axons  and 
dendrites,  we  could  nevertheless  make  a  model,  within  the  ACE,  in  which  this  possibility 
was  allowed  for,  but  in  which  the  actual  construction  of  the  ACE  did  not  alter,  but  only  the 
remembered  data,  describing  the  mode  of  behaviour  applicable  at  any  time.  I  feel  that  you 
would  be  well  advised  to  take  advantage  of  this  principle,  and  do  your  experiments  on  the 
ACE,  instead  of  building  a  special  machine.  I  should  be  very  glad  to  help  you  over  this.57 


The  Lecture 

On  20  February  1947  Turing  lectured  on  the  ACE  to  the  London  Mathematical 
Society.58  So  far  as  is  known,  this  was  the  earliest  public  lecture  to  mention 
computer  intelligence,  providing  a  breathtaking  glimpe  of  a  new  field.  Turing 
discussed  the  prospect  of  machines  acting  intelligently,  learning,  and  beating 
human  opponents  at  chess,  remarking  that  ‘  [w]  hat  we  want  is  a  machine  that  can 
learn  from  experience’  and  that  ‘  [t]  he  possibility  of  letting  the  machine  alter  its 
own  instructions  provides  the  mechanism  for  this’. 

The  lecture  is  also  of  note  for  its  early  discussion  of  computer  programming. 
By  the  time  of  the  lecture,  Turing  had  been  developing  programmes — then  called 
‘instruction  tables’  (see  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’) — for  the  not- 
yet-existent  ACE  for  well  over  a  year.  As  Womersley  was  to  remark  in  1948, 
‘The  planning  of  the  ACE  is  far  ahead  of  the  hardware.’59  During  this  period, 
Turing  and  the  other  members  of  the  ACE  Section  brought  the  nascent  science  of 
computer  programming  to  a  state  of  considerable  sophistication. 

Among  Turing’s  many  technical  innovations  was  the  use  of  what  are  now 
called  subroutines,  or  in  Turing’s  term,  ‘subsidiary  tables’  (see  ‘Computable 
Numbers:  A  Guide’). 

57  Letter  from  Turing  to  W.  Ross  Ashby,  no  date  (Woodger  Papers  (catalogue  reference  Ml  1/99);  a  digital 
facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/turing_ashby>). 
The  letter  was  probably  written  in  1946  and  certainly  prior  to  October  1947. 

58  The  lecture  was  held  at  5  p.m.  in  the  rooms  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society  at  Burlington  House  in 
London  (entry  in  Woodger’s  diary  for  20  Feb.  1947  (Copeland  is  grateful  to  Woodger  for  this  information)). 

59  Minutes  of  the  NPL  Executive  Committee,  20  Apr.  1948  (National  Physical  Laboratory  library;  a 
digital  facsimile  is  in  The  Turing  Archive  for  the  History  of  Computing  <www.AlanTuring.net/ 
npl_minutes_apr 1 948 > ) . 


376  I  Jack  Copeland 


Turing  devoted  about  a  quarter  of  his  lecture  to  a  discussion  of  computer 
memory,  saying  (p.  383): 

I  have  spent  a  considerable  time  in  this  lecture  on  this  question  of  memory,  because  I 
believe  that  the  provision  of  proper  storage  is  the  key  to  the  problem  of  the  digital 
computer,  and  certainly  if  they  are  to  be  persuaded  to  show  any  sort  of  genuine  intelli¬ 
gence  much  larger  capacities  than  are  yet  available  must  be  provided. 

It  was  precisely  Turing’s  desire  to  conduct  experiments  in  AI  that  led  him  to 
propose  such  a  large  memory  in  the  ACE.60 


Delay  Line  Memory  and  Optimum  Programming 

The  fundamental  feature  of  the  ACE  design,  which  influenced  virtually  all  other 
aspects  of  it,  was  Turing’s  adoption  of  acoustic  delay  lines  to  form  the  high-speed 
memory.  He  remarked  in  the  lecture  that  the  chief  advantage  of  delay  lines  as  a 
memory  medium — they  were  far  from  ideal — was  that  they  were  ‘already  a  going 
concern’  (p.  380).  The  acoustic  delay  line  was  pioneered  in  1942  by  W.  B.  Shockley, 
later  one  of  the  co-inventors  of  the  transistor,  and  in  1943  Presper  Eckert  and 
others  at  the  Moore  School  (home  of  the  ENIAC)  independently  investigated  a 
different  type  of  acoustic  delay  line  filled  with  mercury.61  Subsequently,  acoustic 
delay  lines  were  widely  employed  in  radar.  It  was  Eckert  who  first  proposed  their 
use  in  digital  computers  (see  ‘Computable  Numbers:  A  Guide’). 

The  following  description  of  a  mercury  delay  line  is  from  Turing’s  ‘Proposed 
Electronic  Calculator’: 

It  is  proposed  to  build  ‘delay  line’  units  consisting  of  mercury. . .  tubes  about  5'  long  and 
1"  in  diameter  in  contact  with  a  quartz  crystal  at  each  end.  The  velocity  of  sound 
in ...  mercury. ..  is  such  that  the  delay  will  be  1.024  ms.  The  information  to  be  stored 
may  be  considered  to  be  a  sequence  of  1024  ‘digits’  (0  or  1)... These  digits  will  be 
represented  by  a  corresponding  sequence  of  pulses.  The  digit  0 . . .  will  be  represented  by 
the  absence  of  a  pulse  at  the  appropriate  time,  the  digit  1 ...  by  its  presence.  This  series  of 
pulses  is  impressed  on  the  end  of  the  line  by  one  piezo-crystal,  it  is  transmitted  down  the 
line  in  the  form  of  supersonic  waves,  and  is  reconverted  into  a  varying  voltage  by  the 
crystal  at  the  far  end.  This  voltage  is  amplified  sufficiently  to  give  an  output  of  the  order  of 
10  volts  peak  to  peak  and  is  used  to  gate  a  standard  pulse  generated  by  the  clock.  This 
pulse  may  be  again  fed  into  the  line  by  means  of  the  transmitting  crystal,  or  we  may  feed 
in  some  altogether  different  signal.  We  also  have  the  possibility  of  leading  the  gated  pulse 
to  some  other  part  of  the  calculator,  if  we  have  need  of  that  information  at  the  time. 
Making  use  of  the  information  does  not  of  course  preclude  keeping  it  also.62 

60  Woodger  in  interview  with  Copeland  (June  1998). 

61  A.  G.  Emslie,  H.  B.  Huntington,  H.  Shapiro,  and  A.  E.  Benfield,  ‘Ultrasonic  Delay  Lines  II’,  Journal  of 
the  Franklin  Institute ,  245  (1948),  101-15  (101-2).  In  Shockley’s  delay  line,  the  transmitting  medium  was 
not  mercury  but  ethylene  glycol. 

62  ‘Proposed  Electronic  Calculator’,  5. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  377 


As  Turing  noted  in  his  1947  lecture,  the  ACE’s  memory  was  to  consist  of 
approximately  200  such  delay  lines.  In  the  event,  the  Big  ACE  contained  only  a 
few  dozen  delay  lines,  supplemented  by  four  magnetic  drums. 

Having  decided  to  use  delay  lines,  Turing  was  determined  to  maximize  their 
effectiveness.  The  time  taken  for  an  instruction,  or  number,  to  emerge  from  a 
delay  line  will  depend  on  where  in  the  delay  line  it  happens  to  be.  In  order  to 
minimize  waiting  time,  Turing  arranged  for  instructions  to  be  stored  not  at 
regular  intervals  in  a  delay  line,  but  in  irregular  positions.  These  positions  were 
selected  by  the  programmer  in  such  a  way  that  each  instruction  would  emerge 
from  its  delay  line  at  precisely  the  time  it  was  required.  This  system  became 
known  at  the  NPL  as  ‘optimum  coding’  (and  later  ‘optimum  programming’). 

Optimum  coding  made  for  difficult  and  untidy  programming  but  the  advan¬ 
tage  in  terms  of  speed  was  considerable.  Thanks  to  optimum  coding,  the  Pilot 
Model  ACE  was  able  to  do  a  floating  point  multiplication  in  3  milliseconds.63 
The  EDSAC  computer  at  Cambridge  University — a  slower  delay  line  machine 
lacking  optimum  coding — required  4.5  milliseconds  to  perform  a  single  fixed 
point  multiplication.64 


Further  reading 

Campbell-Kelly,  M.,  ‘Programming  the  Pilot  ACE:  Early  Programming  Activity  at  the 
National  Physical  Laboratory’,  Annals  of  the  History  of  Computing ,  3  (1981),  133-62. 
Carpenter,  B.  E.,  and  Doran,  R.  W.  (eds.),  A.  M.  Turing’s  ACE  Report  of  1946  and  Other 
Papers  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  1986). 

Copeland,  B.  J.  (ed.),  Alan  Turing’s  Automatic  Computing  Engine  (Oxford:  Oxford  Univer¬ 
sity  Press,  2004). 

Yates,  D.  M.,  Turing’s  Legacy:  A  History  of  Computing  at  the  National  Physical  Laboratory 
1945-1995  (London:  Science  Museum,  1997). 


Provenance 

What  follows  is  the  text  of  the  lecture  taken  from  Turing’s  own  typescript 
(which  is  headed  ‘Lecture  to  L.M.S.  Feb.  20  1947’).65 

63  Wilkinson  in  interview  with  Evans  (see  n.  11). 

64  M.  Campbell-Kelly,  ‘Programming  the  EDSAC:  Early  Programming  Activity  at  the  University  of 
Cambridge’,  Annals  of  the  History  of  Computing,  2  (1980),  7-36. 

65  Turing’s  typescript  is  among  the  Turing  Papers  in  the  Modern  Archive  Centre,  King’s  College, 
Cambridge  (catalogue  reference  B  1).  It  was  first  published  in  1986  in  Carpenter  and  Doran,  A.  M.  Turing's 
ACE  Report  of  1946  and  Other  Papers.  The  present  edition  differs  from  the  1986  edition  in  various  small 
respects.  A  few  missing  words  have  been  restored  (on  pp.  379  and  381)  and  some  minor  departures  in  the 
earlier  edition  from  Turing’s  original  text  have  been  rectified.  Many  of  Turing’s  sketch  diagrams  (reproduced 
in  the  1986  edition)  have  been  redrawn.  Obvious  typing  and  spelling  errors  in  Turing’s  typescript  have  been 
corrected  without  comment.  Words  or  letters  enclosed  in  square  brackets  have  been  added  by  the  editor. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine 

The  automatic  computing  engine  now  being  designed  at  N.P.L.  is  a  typical  large 
scale  electronic  digital  computing  machine.  In  a  single  lecture  it  will  not  be 
possible  to  give  much  technical  detail  of  this  machine,  and  most  of  what  I  shall 
say  will  apply  equally  to  any  other  machine  of  this  type  now  being  planned. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  the  mathematician  the  property  of  being  digital 
should  be  of  greater  interest  than  that  of  being  electronic.  That  it  is  electronic  is 
certainly  important  because  these  machines  owe  their  high  speed  to  this,  and 
without  the  speed  it  is  doubtful  if  financial  support  for  their  construction  would 
be  forthcoming.  But  this  is  virtually  all  that  there  is  to  be  said  on  that  subject. 
That  the  machine  is  digital  however  has  more  subtle  significance.  It  means  firstly 
that  numbers  are  represented  by  sequences  of  digits  which  can  be  as  long  as  one 
wishes.  One  can  therefore  work  to  any  desired  degree  of  accuracy.  This  accuracy 
is  not  obtained  by  more  careful  machining  of  parts,  control  of  temperature 
variations,  and  such  means,  but  by  a  slight  increase  in  the  amount  of  equipment 
in  the  machine.  To  double  the  number  of  significant  figures  used  would  involve 
increasing  the  equipment  by  a  factor  definitely  less  than  two,  and  would  also  have 
some  effect  in  increasing  the  time  taken  over  each  job.  This  is  in  sharp  contrast 
with  analogue  machines,  and  continuous  variable  machines  such  as  the  differen¬ 
tial  analyser,  where  each  additional  decimal  digit  required  necessitates  a  complete 
redesign  of  the  machine,  and  an  increase  in  the  cost  by  perhaps  as  much  as  a 
factor  of  10.  A  second  advantage  of  digital  computing  machines  is  that  they  are 
not  restricted  in  their  applications  to  any  particular  type  of  problem.  The 
differential  analyser  is  by  far  the  most  general  type  of  analogue  machine  yet 
produced,  but  even  it  is  comparatively  limited  in  its  scope.  It  can  be  made  to  deal 
with  almost  any  kind  of  ordinary  differential  equation,  but  it  is  hardly  able  to 
deal  with  partial  differential  equations  at  all,  and  certainly  cannot  manage  large 
numbers  of  linear  simultaneous  equations,  or  the  zeros  of  polynomials.  With 
digital  machines  however  it  is  almost  literally  true  that  they  are  able  to  tackle  any 
computing  problem.  A  good  working  rule  is  that  the  ACE  can  be  made  to  do  any 
job  that  could  be  done  by  a  human  computer,  and  will  do  it  in  one  ten- 
thousandth  of  the  time.  This  time  estimate  is  fairly  reliable,  except  in  cases 
where  the  job  is  too  trivial  to  be  worth  while  giving  to  the  ACE. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  researching  on  what  might  now  be  described  as  an 
investigation  of  the  theoretical  possibilities  and  limitations  of  digital  computing 
machines.  I  considered  a  type  of  machine  which  had  a  central  mechanism,  and  an 
infinite  memory  which  was  contained  on  an  infinite  tape.  This  type  of  machine 
appeared  to  be  sufficiently  general.  One  of  my  conclusions  was  that  the  idea  of  a 
‘rule  of  thumb’  process  and  a  ‘machine  process’  were  synonymous.  The  expres- 

Reproduced  with  permission  of  the  Estate  of  Alan  Turing. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  379 


sion  ‘machine  process’  of  course  means  one  which  could  be  carried  out  by  the 
type  of  machine  I  was  considering.  It  was  essential  in  these  theoretical  arguments 
that  the  memory  should  be  infinite.  It  can  easily  be  shown  that  otherwise  the 
machine  can  only  execute  periodic  operations.  Machines  such  as  the  ACE  may  be 
regarded  as  practical  versions  of  this  same  type  of  machine.  There  is  at  least  a  very 
close  analogy.  Digital  computing  machines  all  have  a  central  mechanism  or 
control  and  some  very  extensive  form  of  memory.  The  memory  does  not  have 
to  be  infinite,  but  it  certainly  needs  to  be  very  large.  In  general  the  arrangement  of 
the  memory  on  an  infinite  tape  is  unsatisfactory  in  a  practical  machine,  because 
of  the  large  amount  of  time  which  is  liable  to  be  spent  in  shifting  up  and  down  the 
tape  to  reach  the  point  at  which  a  particular  piece  of  information  required  at  the 
moment  is  stored.  Thus  a  problem  might  easily  need  a  storage  of  three  million 
entries,  and  if  each  entry  was  equally  likely  to  be  the  next  required  the  average 
journey  up  the  tape  would  be  through  a  million  entries,  and  this  would  be 
intolerable.  One  needs  some  form  of  memory  with  which  any  required  entry 
can  be  reached  at  short  notice.  This  difficulty  presumably  used  to  worry  the 
Egyptians  when  their  books  were  written  on  papyrus  scrolls.  It  must  have  been 
slow  work  looking  up  references  in  them,  and  the  present  arrangement  of  written 
matter  in  books  which  can  be  opened  at  any  point  is  greatly  to  be  preferred.  We 
may  say  that  storage  on  tape  and  papyrus  scrolls  is  somewhat  inaccessible.  It  takes 
a  considerable  time  to  find  a  given  entry.  Memory  in  book  form  is  a  good  deal 
better,  and  is  certainly  highly  suitable  when  it  is  to  be  read  by  the  human  eye.  We 
could  even  imagine  a  computing  machine  that  was  made  to  work  with  a  memory 
based  on  books.  It  would  not  be  very  easy  but  would  be  immensely  preferable  to 
the  single  long  tape.  Let  us  for  the  sake  of  argument  suppose  that  the  difficulties 
involved  in  using  books  as  memory  were  overcome,  that  is  to  say  that  mechanical 
devices  for  finding  the  right  book  and  opening  it  at  the  right  page,  etc.  etc.  had 
been  developed,  imitating  the  use  of  human  hands  and  eyes.  The  information 
contained  in  the  books  would  still  be  rather  inaccessible  because  of  the  time 
occupied  in  the  mechanical  motions.  One  cannot  turn  a  page  over  very  quickly 
without  tearing  it,  and  if  one  were  to  do  much  book  transportation,  and  do  it  fast 
the  energy  involved  would  be  very  great.  Thus  if  we  moved  one  book  every 
millisecond  and  each  was  moved  ten  metres  and  weighed  200  grams,  and  if  the 
kinetic  energy  were  wasted  each  time  we  should  consume  1010  watts,  about  half 
the  country’s  power  consumption.  If  we  are  to  have  a  really  fast  machine  then,  we 
must  have  our  information,  or  at  any  rate  a  part  of  it,  in  a  more  accessible  form 
than  can  be  obtained  with  books.  It  seems  that  this  can  only  be  done  at  the 
expense  of  compactness  and  economy,  e.g.  by  cutting  the  pages  out  of  the  books, 
and  putting  each  one  into  a  separate  reading  mechanism.  Some  of  the  methods  of 
storage  which  are  being  developed  at  the  present  time  are  not  unlike  this. 

If  one  wishes  to  go  to  the  extreme  of  accessibility  in  storage  mechanisms  one  is 
liable  to  find  that  it  is  gained  at  the  price  of  an  intolerable  loss  of  compactness 


380  I  Alan  Turing 


and  economy.  For  instance  the  most  accessible  known  form  of  storage  is  that 
provided  by  the  valve  flip-flop  or  Jordan  Eccles  trigger  circuit.  This  enables  us  to 
store  one  digit,  capable  of  two  values,  and  uses  two  thermionic  valves.  To  store 
the  content  of  an  ordinary  novel  by  such  means  would  cost  many  millions  of 
pounds.  We  clearly  need  some  compromise  method  of  storage  which  is  more 
accessible  than  paper,  film  etc,  but  more  economical  in  space  and  money  than 
the  straightforward  use  of  valves.  Another  desirable  feature  is  that  it  should  be 
possible  to  record  into  the  memory  from  within  the  computing  machine,  and 
this  should  be  possible  whether  or  not  the  storage  already  contains  something, 
i.e.  the  storage  should  be  erasible. 

There  are  three  main  types  of  storage  which  have  been  developed  recently  and 
have  these  properties  in  greater  or  less  degree.  Magnetic  wire  is  very  compact,  is 
erasible,  can  be  recorded  on  from  within  the  machine,  and  is  moderately 
accessible.  There  is  storage  in  the  form  of  charge  patterns  on  the  screen  of  a 
cathode  ray  tube.  This  is  probably  the  ultimate  solution.  It  could  eventually  be 
nearly  as  accessible  as  the  Jordan  Eccles  circuit.  A  third  possibility  is  provided  by 
acoustic  delay  lines.  They  give  greater  accessibility  than  the  magnetic  wire, 
though  less  than  the  C.R.T  type.  The  accessibility  is  adequate  for  most  purposes. 
Their  chief  advantage  is  that  they  are  already  a  going  concern.  It  is  intended  that 
the  main  memory  of  the  ACE  shall  be  provided  by  acoustic  delay  lines,  consisting 
of  mercury  tanks. 

The  idea  of  using  acoustic  delay  lines  as  memory  units  is  due  I  believe  to 
Eckert  of  Philadelphia  University,1  who  was  the  engineer  chiefly  responsible  for 
the  Eniac.  The  idea  is  to  store  the  information  in  the  form  of  compression  waves 
travelling  along  a  column  of  mercury.  Liquids  and  solids  will  transmit  sound  of 
surprisingly  high  frequency,  and  it  is  quite  feasible  to  put  as  many  as  1,000  pulses 
into  a  single  5'  tube.  The  signals  may  be  conveyed  into  the  mercury  by  a  piezo¬ 
electric  crystal;  and  also  detected  at  the  far  end  by  another  quartz  crystal.  A  train 
of  pulses  or  the  information  which  they  represent  may  be  regarded  as  stored  in 
the  mercury  whilst  it  is  travelling  through  it.  If  the  information  is  not  required 
when  the  train  emerges  it  can  be  fed  back  into  the  column  again  and  again  until 
such  time  as  it  is  required.  This  requires  a  ‘recirculating  circuit’  to  read  the  signal 



r- 

j  ; 

Recirculating 

circuit 

Figure  9.1. 


Editor’s  note.  Turing  means  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  Philadelphia. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  381 


as  it  emerges  from  the  tank  and  amplify  it  and  feed  it  in  again.  If  this  were  done 
with  a  simple  amplifier  it  is  clear  that  the  characteristics  of  both  the  tank  and  the 
amplifier  would  have  to  be  extremely  good  to  permit  the  signal  to  pass  through 
even  as  many  as  ten  times.  Actually  the  recirculating  circuit  does  something 
slightly  different.  What  it  does  may  perhaps  be  best  expressed  in  terms  of  point 
set  topology.  Let  the  plane  of  the  diagram  represent  the  space  of  all  possible 
signals.  I  do  not  of  course  wish  to  imply  that  this  is  two  dimensional.  Let  the 
function  /  be  defined  for  arguments  in  this  signal  space  and  have  values  in  it. 
In  fact  let/(s)  represent  the  effect  on  the  signal  s  when  it  is  passed  through  the  tank 
and  the  recirculating  mechanism.  We  assume  however  that  owing  to  thermal 
agitation  the  effect  of  recirculation  may  be  to  give  any  pt  [point]  within  a  circle  of 
radius  8  of/(s) .  Then  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  that  the  tank  can  be  used 
as  a  storage  which  will  distinguish  between  N different  signals  is  that  there  must  be 
N  sets  Ei ...  Em  such  that  if  Fr  is  the  set  of  pts  [points]  within  distance  £  of  Er 

s  €  Fr  D  f(s)  G  Er 

and  the  sets  Fr  are  disjoint.  It  is  clearly  sufficient  for  we  have  only  then  to  ensure 
that  the  signals  initially  fed  in  belong  to  one  or  other  of  the  sets  Fn  and  it  will 
remain  in  the  set  after  any  number  of  recirculations,  without  any  danger  of 
confusion.  It  is  necessary  for  suppose  S\ . . .  are  signals  which  have  different 
meanings  and  which  can  be  fed  into  the  machine  at  any  time  and  read  out  later 
without  fear  of  confusion. 

Let  Er  be  the  set  of  signals  which  could  be  obtained  for  sr  by  successive 
applications  of  /  and  shifts  of  distance  not  more  than  £.  Then  the  sets  Er  are 
disjoint,  [five  or  six  illegible  words],  and  by  applying  a  shift  of  distance  £  or  less  to 
pts  [points]  of  Er  we  obtain  [line  missing  from  bottom  of  page].  In  the  case  of  a 
mercury  delay  line  used  for  N  =  16  the  set  would  consist  of  all  continuous 
signals  within  the  shaded  area. 


,  J 

h 

mwxummM 

Figure  9.2. 


One  of  the  sets  would  consist  of  all  continuous  signals  lying  in  the  region  below. 
It  would  represent  the  signal  1001. 


Figure  9.3. 


382  I  Alan  Turing 


In  order  to  put  such  a  recirculation  system  into  effect  it  is  essential  that  a  clock 
signal  be  supplied  to  the  memory  system  so  that  it  will  be  able  to  distinguish  the 
times  when  a  pulse  if  any  should  be  present.  It  would  for  instance  be  natural  to 
supply  a  timing  sine  wave  as  shown  above  to  the  recirculator. 

The  idea  of  a  process  /with  the  properties  we  have  described  is  a  very  common 
one  in  connection  with  storage  devices.  It  is  known  as  ‘regeneration’  of  storage.  It 
is  always  present  in  some  form,  but  sometimes  the  regeneration  is  as  it  were 
naturally  occurring  and  no  precautions  have  to  be  taken.  In  other  cases  special 
precautions  have  to  be  taken  to  improve  such  an  /process  or  else  the  impression 
will  fade. 

The  importance  of  a  clock  to  the  regeneration  process  in  delay  lines  may  be 
illustrated  by  an  interesting  little  theorem.  Suppose  that  instead  of  the  condition 
s  G  Fr  D  f(s)  G  Er  we  impose  a  stronger  one,  viz  /"(s)  — »  cr  if  s  G  Er,  i.e.  there  are 
ideal  forms  of  the  distinguishable  signals,  and  each  admissible  signal  converges 
towards  the  ideal  form  after  recirculating.  Then  we  can  show  that  unless  there  is  a 
clock  the  ideal  signals  are  all  constants.  For  let  Ua  represent  a  shift  of  origin, 
i.e.  Uas(t )  =  s(t  +  a).  Then  since  there  is  no  clock  the  properties  of  the  recir¬ 
culator  are  the  same  at  all  times  and  /  therefore  commutes  with  Ua. 
Then  fUa(cr )  =  Uaf{cr)  =  Uacr,  for  f(cr )  =  cr  since  cr  is  an  ideal  signal.  But 
this  means  that  Ua(cr)  is  an  ideal  signal,  and  therefore  for  sufficiently 
small  a  must  be  cr,  since  the  ideal  signals  are  discrete.  Then  for  any  (3  and  sufficiently 
large  n,  (3 jn  will  be  sufficiently  small  and  Um„(c)  =  c.  But  then  by  iteration 
c  =  U^n(c)  =  Up(c)  i.e.  c(t  +  (3)  =  c{t).  This  means  that  the  ideal  signal  c  is  a 
constant. 

We  might  say  that  the  clock  enables  us  to  introduce  a  discreteness  into  time,  so 
that  time  can  for  some  purposes  be  regarded  as  a  succession  of  instants  instead 
of  as  a  continuous  flow.  A  digital  machine  must  essentially  deal  with 
discrete  objects,  and  in  the  case  of  the  ACE  this  is  made  possible  by  the  use 
of  a  clock.  All  other  digital  computing  machines  that  I  know  of  except  for 
human  and  other  brains  do  the  same.  One  can  think  up  ways  of  avoiding 
it,  but  they  are  very  awkward.  I  should  mention  that  the  use  of  the  clock  in 
the  ACE  is  not  confined  to  the  recirculation  process,  but  is  used  in  almost 
every  part. 

It  may  be  as  well  to  mention  some  figures  connected  with  the  mercury  delay 
line  as  we  shall  use  it.  We  shall  use  five  foot  tubes,  with  a[n]  inside  diameter  of 
half  an  inch.  Each  of  these  will  enable  us  to  store  1024  binary  digits.  The  unit  I 
have  used  here  to  describe  storage  capacity  is  self  explanatory.  A  storage  mech¬ 
anism  has  a  capacity  of  m  binary  digits  if  it  can  remember  any  sequence  of  m 
digits  each  being  a  0  or  a  1.  The  storage  capacity  is  also  the  logarithm  to  the  base 
2  of  the  number  of  different  signals  which  can  be  remembered,  i.e.  log2  N.  The 
digits  will  be  placed  at  a  time  interval  of  one  microsecond,  so  that  the  time  taken 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  383 


for  the  waves  to  travel  down  the  tube  is  just  over  a  millisecond.  The  velocity  is 
about  one  and  a  half  kilometres  per  second.  The  delay  in  accessibility  time  or 
average  waiting  for  a  given  piece  of  information  is  about  half  a  millisecond.  In 
practice  this  is  reduced  to  an  effective  150  ps.2  The  full  storage  capacity  of  the 
ACE  available  on  Hg3  delay  lines  will  be  about  200,000  binary  digits.  This  is 
probably  comparable  with  the  memory  capacity  of  a  minnow. 

I  have  spent  a  considerable  time  in  this  lecture  on  this  question  of  memory, 
because  I  believe  that  the  provision  of  proper  storage  is  the  key  to  the  problem  of 
the  digital  computer,  and  certainly  if  they  are  to  be  persuaded  to  show  any  sort  of 
genuine  intelligence  much  larger  capacities  than  are  yet  available  must  be 
provided.  In  my  opinion  this  problem  of  making  a  large  memory  available  at 
reasonably  short  notice  is  much  more  important  than  that  of  doing  operations 
such  as  multiplication  at  high  speed.  Speed  is  necessary  if  the  machine  is  to  work 
fast  enough  for  the  machine  to  be  commercially  valuable,  but  a  large  storage 
capacity  is  necessary  if  it  is  to  be  capable  of  anything  more  than  rather  trivial 
operations.  The  storage  capacity  is  therefore  the  more  fundamental  requirement. 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  analogy  of  the  theoretical  computing  machines  with 
an  infinite  tape.  It  can  be  shown  that  a  single  special  machine  of  that  type  can  be 
made  to  do  the  work  of  all.  It  could  in  fact  be  made  to  work  as  a  model  of  any 
other  machine.  The  special  machine  may  be  called  the  universal  machine;  it 
works  in  the  following  quite  simple  manner.  When  we  have  decided  what 
machine  we  wish  to  imitate  we  punch  a  description  of  it  on  the  tape  of  the 
universal  machine.  This  description  explains  what  the  machine  would  do  in 
every  configuration  in  which  it  might  find  itself.  The  universal  machine  has  only 
to  keep  looking  at  this  description  in  order  to  find  out  what  it  should  do  at  each 
stage.  Thus  the  complexity  of  the  machine  to  be  imitated  is  concentrated  in  the 
tape  and  does  not  appear  in  the  universal  machine  proper  in  any  way. 

If  we  take  the  properties  of  the  universal  machine  in  combination  with  the  fact 
that  machine  processes  and  rule  of  thumb  processes  are  synonymous  we  may  say 
that  the  universal  machine  is  one  which,  when  supplied  with  the  appropriate 
instructions,  can  be  made  to  do  any  rule  of  thumb  process.  This  feature  is  paralleled 
in  digital  computing  machines  such  as  the  ACE.  They  are  in  fact  practical  versions  of 
the  universal  machine.  There  is  a  certain  central  pool  of  electronic  equipment,  and  a 
large  memory.  When  any  particular  problem  has  to  be  handled  the  appropriate 
instructions  for  the  computing  process  involved  are  stored  in  the  memory  of  the 
ACE  and  it  is  then  ‘set  up’  for  carrying  out  that  process. 

I  have  indicated  the  main  strategic  ideas  behind  digital  computing  machinery, 
and  will  now  follow  this  account  up  with  the  very  briefest  description  of  the 
ACE.  It  may  be  divided  for  the  sake  of  argument  into  the  following  parts 

2  Editor’s  note.  [ iS  =  microseconds. 

3  Editor’s  note.  Hg  =  mercury. 


384  I  Alan  Turing 


Memory 

Control 

Arithmetic  part 
Input  and  Output 

I  have  already  said  enough  about  the  memory  and  will  only  repeat  that  in  the 
ACE  the  memory  will  consist  mainly  of  200  mercury  delay  lines  each  holding 
1024  binary  digits.  The  purpose  of  the  control  is  to  take  the  right  instructions 
from  the  memory,  see  what  they  mean,  and  arrange  for  them  to  be  carried  out.  It 
is  understood  that  a  certain  ‘code  of  instructions’  has  been  laid  down,  whereby 
each  ‘word’  or  combination  of  say  32  binary  digits  describes  some  particular 
operation.  The  circuit  of  the  control  is  made  in  accordance  with  the  code,  so  that 
the  right  effect  is  produced.  To  a  large  extent  we  have  also  allowed  the  circuit  to 
determine  the  code,  i.e.  we  have  not  just  thought  up  an  imaginary  ‘best  code’  and 
then  found  a  circuit  to  put  it  into  effect,  but  have  often  simplified  the  circuit  at 
the  expense  of  the  code.  It  is  also  quite  difficult  to  think  about  the  code  entirely 
in  abstracto  without  any  kind  of  circuit. 

The  arithmetic  part  of  the  machine  is  the  part  concerned  with  addition, 
multiplication  and  any  other  operations  which  it  seems  worth  while  to  do  by 
means  of  special  circuits  rather  than  through  the  simple  facilities  provided  by  the 
control.  The  distinction  between  control  and  arithmetic  part  is  a  rather  hazy  one, 
but  at  any  rate  it  is  clear  that  the  machine  should  at  least  have  an  adder  and  a 
multiplier,  even  if  they  turn  out  in  the  end  to  be  part  of  the  control.  This  is  the 
point  at  which  I  should  mention  that  the  machine  is  operated  in  the  binary  scale, 
with  two  qualifications.  Inputs  from  externally  provided  data  are  in  decimal,  and 
so  are  outputs  intended  for  human  eyes  rather  than  for  later  reconsumption  by 
the  ACE.  This  is  the  first  qualification.  The  second  is  that,  in  spite  of  the 
intention  of  binary  working  there  can  be  no  bar  on  decimal  working  of  a  kind, 
because  of  the  relation  of  the  ACE  to  the  universal  machine.  Binary  working  is 
the  most  natural  thing  to  do  with  any  large  scale  computer.  It  is  much  easier  to 
work  in  the  scale  of  two  than  any  other,  because  it  is  so  easy  to  produce 
mechanisms  which  have  two  positions  of  stability:  the  two  positions  may  then 


Figure  9.4. 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  385 


Figure  9.5. 

Editor’s  note.  I  am  grateful  to  John  Andreae  and  David  Clayden  for  assistance  with  redrawing  Turing’s 
original  figure.  The  figure  shows  an  Eccles-Jordan  trigger  circuit,  also  known  as  a  bistable  circuit  or  flip- 
flop.  The  circuit  has  two  stable  states.  In  one,  current  flows  through  the  left-hand  triode  valve  but  not 
through  the  right;  in  the  other,  current  flows  through  the  right-hand  triode  but  not  the  left.  The  circuit  can 
be  switched  from  one  state  to  the  other  by  applying  a  pulse  to  one  of  the  valves. 


be  regarded  as  representing  0  and  1.  Examples  are  lever  as  diagram,  Jordan  Eccles 
circuit,  thyratron.  If  one  is  concerned  with  a  small  scale  calculating  machine  then 
there  is  at  least  one  serious  objection  to  binary  working.  For  practical  use  it  will 
be  necessary  to  build  a  converter  to  transform  numbers  from  the  binary  form  to 
the  decimal  and  back.  This  may  well  be  a  larger  undertaking  than  the  binary 
calculator.  With  the  large  scale  machines  this  argument  carries  no  weight.  In  the 
first  place  a  converter  would  become  a  relatively  small  piece  of  apparatus,  and  in 
the  second  it  would  not  really  be  necessary.  This  last  statement  sounds  quite 
paradoxical,  but  it  is  a  simple  consequence  of  the  fact  that  these  machines  can  be 
made  to  do  any  rule  of  thumb  process  by  remembering  suitable  instructions.  In 
particular  it  can  be  made  to  do  binary  decimal  conversion.  For  example  in  the 
case  of  the  ACE  the  provision  of  the  converter  involves  no  more  than  adding  two 
extra  delay  lines  to  the  memory.  This  situation  is  very  typical  of  what  happens 
with  the  ACE.  There  are  many  fussy  little  details  which  have  to  be  taken  care  of, 
and  which,  according  to  normal  engineering  practice,  would  require  special 
circuits.  We  are  able  to  deal  with  these  points  without  modification  of  the 
machine  itself,  by  pure  paper  work,  eventually  resulting  in  feeding  in  appropriate 
instructions. 

To  return  to  the  various  parts  of  the  machine.  I  was  saying  that  it  will  work  in 
the  scale  of  two.  It  is  not  unnatural  to  use  the  convention  that  an  electrical  pulse 
shall  represent  the  digit  1  and  that  absence  of  a  pulse  shall  represent  a  digit  0. 
Thus  a  sequence  of  digits  0010110  would  be  represented  by  a  signal  like 


386  I  Alan  Turing 


.  r\ . 

0  0  10 

Figure  9.6. 




where  the  time  interval  might  be  one  microsecond.  Let  us  now  look  at  what  the 
process  of  binary  addition  is  like.  In  ordinary  decimal  addition  we  always  begin 
from  the  right,  and  the  same  naturally  applies  to  binary.  We  have  to  do  this  because 
we  cannot  tell  whether  to  carry  unless  we  have  already  dealt  with  the  less  signifi¬ 
cant  columns.  The  same  applies  with  electronic  addition,  and  therefore  it  is 
convenient  to  use  the  convention  that  if  a  sequence  of  pulses  is  coming  down  a 
line,  then  the  least  significant  pulse  always  comes  first.  This  has  the  unfortunate 
result  that  we  must  either  write  the  least  significant  digit  on  the  left  in  our  binary 
numbers  or  else  make  time  flow  from  right  to  left  in  our  diagrams.  As  the  latter 
alternative  would  involve  writing  from  right  to  left  as  well  as  adding  in  that  way,  we 
have  decided  to  put  the  least  significant  digit  on  the  left.  Now  let  us  do  a  typical 
addition.  Let  us  write  the  carry  digits  above  the  addends. 

Carry  0  111110  0  1  1 

A  0  110  110  0  10  1  ... 

B  0  1  1  1  0  1  0  0  1  1  ... 


0  1  0  0  1  1  0  0  0 


Note  that  I  can  do  the  addition  only  looking  at  a  small  part  of  the  data.  To  do  the 
addition  electronically  we  need  to  produce  a  circuit  with  three  inputs  and  two 
outputs. 


Inputs 

Addend  A  a 

Addend  B  (3 

Carry  from  last  column 


Outputs 

Sum 

Carry 


This  circuit  must  be  such  that 



e 


If  no.  of  Is  on  inputs  a,  P,  y  is 


{0  Then  sum  0  and  0 

1  8  1  carry  0 

2  is  0  s  1 

3  1  is  1 


It  is  very  easy  to  produce  a  voltage  proportional  to  the  number  of  pulses  on  the 
inputs,  and  one  then  merely  has  to  provide  a  circuit  which  will  discriminate  between 
four  different  levels  and  put  out  the  appropriate  sum  and  carry  digits.  I  will  not 
attempt  to  describe  such  a  circuit;  it  can  be  quite  simple.  When  we  are  given  the 
circuit  we  merely  have  to  connect  it  up  with  feedback  and  it  is  an  adder.  Thus: 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  387 


It  will  be  seen  that  we  have  made  use  of  the  fact  that  the  same  process  is  used  in 
addition  with  each  digit,  and  also  the  fact  that  the  properties  of  the  electrical 
circuit  are  invariant  under  time  shifts,  at  any  rate  if  these  are  multiples  of  the 
clock  period.  It  might  be  said  that  we  have  made  use  of  the  isomorphism 
between  the  group  of  these  time  shifts  and  the  multiplicative  group  of  real 
numbers  to  simplify  our  apparatus,  though  I  doubt  if  many  other  applications 
of  this  principle  could  be  found. 

It  will  be  seen  that  with  such  an  adder  the  addition  is  broken  down  into  the  most 
elementary  steps  possible,  such  as  adding  one  and  one.  Each  of  these  occupies  a 
microsecond.  Our  numbers  will  normally  consist  of  32  binary  digits,  so  that  two  of 
them  can  be  added  in  32  microseconds.  Likewise  we  shall  do  multiplications  in  the 
form  of  a  number  of  consecutive  additions  of  one  and  one  or  one  and  zero  etc. 
There  are  1024  such  additions  or  thereabouts  to  be  done  in  a  multiplication  of  one 
32  digit  number  by  another,  so  that  one  might  expect  a  multiplication  to  take 
about  a  millisecond.  Actually  the  multiplier  to  be  used  on  ACE  will  take  rather  over 
two  milliseconds.  This  may  sound  rather  long,  when  the  unit  operation  is  only  a 
microsecond,  but  it  actually  seems  that  the  machine  is  fairly  well  balanced  in  this 
respect,  i.e.  the  multiplication  time  is  not  a  serious  bottleneck.  Computers  always 
spend  just  as  long  in  writing  numbers  down  and  deciding  what  to  do  next  as  they 
do  in  actual  multiplications,  and  it  is  just  the  same  with  the  ACE.  A  great  deal  of 
time  is  spent  in  getting  numbers  in  and  out  of  storage  and  deciding  what  to  do 
next.  To  complete  the  four  elementary  processes,  subtraction  is  done  by  comple¬ 
mentation  and  addition,  and  division  is  done  by  the  use  of  the  iteration  formula 

Un  —  Ufj  —  l  ~T  tiff  —  i  (  1  ClUji  —  1 ) . 

un  converges  to  a~l  provided  |1  —  awo|  <  1.  The  error  is  squared  at  each  step,  so 
that  the  convergence  is  very  rapid.  This  process  is  of  course  programmed,  i.e.  the 
only  extra  apparatus  required  is  the  delay  lines  required  for  storing  the  relevant 
instructions. 


388  I  Alan  Turing 

Passing  on  from  the  arithmetic  part  there  remains  the  input  and  output.  For  this 
purpose  we  have  chosen  Hollerith  card  equipment.  We  are  able  to  obtain  this 
without  having  to  do  any  special  development  work.  The  speeds  obtainable  are 
not  very  impressive  compared  with  the  speeds  at  which  the  electronic  equipment 
works,  but  they  are  quite  sufficient  in  all  cases  where  the  calculation  is  long  and  the 
result  concise:  the  interesting  cases  in  fact.  It  might  appear  that  there  would  be  a 
difficulty  in  converting  the  information  provided  at  the  slow  speeds  appropriate  to 
the  Hollerith  equipment  to  the  high  speeds  required  with  the  ACE,  but  it  is  really 
quite  easy.  The  Hollerith  speeds  are  so  slow  as  to  be  counted  zero  or  stop  for  many 
purposes,  and  the  problem  reduces  to  the  simple  one  of  converting  a  number  of 
statically  given  digits  into  a  stream  of  pulses.  This  can  be  done  by  means  of  a  form  of 
electronic  commutator. 

Before  leaving  the  outline  of  the  description  of  the  machine  I  should  mention 
some  of  the  tactical  situations  that  are  met  with  in  programming.  I  can  illustrate 
two  of  them  in  connection  with  the  calculation  of  the  reciprocal  described  above. 
One  of  these  is  the  idea  of  the  iterative  cycle.  Each  time  that  we  go  from  ur  to 
ur+ 1  we  apply  the  same  sequence  of  operations,  and  it  will  therefore  be  econom¬ 
ical  in  storage  space  if  we  use  the  same  instructions.  Thus  we  go  round  and 
round  a  cycle  of  instructions: 


Ur 


Figure  9.8. 

Editor’s  note.  I  am  grateful  to  Mike  Woodger  for  assistance  with  redrawing  Turing’s  original  diagram. 


It  looks  however  as  if  we  were  in  danger  of  getting  stuck  in  this  cycle,  and 
unable  to  get  out.  The  solution  of  this  difficulty  involves  another  tactical  idea, 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  389 


‘discrimination’  i.e.  of  deciding  what  to  do  next  partly  according  to  the  results  of 
the  machine  itself,  instead  of  according  to  data  available  to  the  programmer.  In 
that  of  this  case  we  include  a  discrimination  in  each  cycle,  which  takes  us  out  of 
the  cycle  when  the  value  of  1 1  —  au\  is  sufficiently  small.  It  is  like  an  aeroplane 
circling  over  an  aerodrome,  and  asking  permission  to  land  after  each  circle.  This 
is  a  very  simple  idea,  but  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  The  idea  of  the  iterative 
cycle  of  instructions  will  also  be  seen  to  be  rather  fundamental  when  it  is  realised 
that  the  majority  of  the  instructions  in  the  memory  must  be  obeyed  a  great 
number  of  times.  If  the  whole  memory  were  occupied  by  instructions,  none  of  it 
being  used  for  numbers  or  other  data,  and  if  each  instruction  were  obeyed  once 
only,  but  took  the  longest  possible  time,  the  machine  could  only  remain  working 
for  sixteen  seconds. 

Another  important  idea  is  that  of  constructing  an  instruction  and  then 
obeying  it.  This  can  be  used  amongst  other  things  for  discrimination.  In  the 
example  I  have  just  taken  for  instance  we  could  calculate  a  quantity  which  was  1  if 
|1  —  au\  was  less  than  2-31  and  0  otherwise.  By  adding  this  quantity  to  the 
instruction  that  is  obeyed  at  the  forking  point  that  instruction  can  be  completely 
altered  in  its  effect  when  finally  1  —  au  is  reduced  to  sufficiently  small  dimen¬ 
sions. 

Probably  the  most  important  idea  involved  in  instruction  tables  is  that  of 
standard  subsidiary  tables.  Certain  processes  are  used  repeatedly  in  all  sorts  of 
different  connections,  and  we  wish  to  use  the  same  instructions,  from  the  same 
part  of  the  memory  every  time.  Thus  we  may  use  interpolation  for  the  calcula¬ 
tion  of  a  great  number  of  different  functions,  but  we  shall  always  use  the  same 
instruction  table  for  interpolation.  We  have  only  to  think  out  how  this  is  to  be 
done  once,  and  forget  then  how  it  is  done.  Each  time  we  want  to  do  an  inter¬ 
polation  we  have  only  to  remember  the  memory  position  where  this  table  is  kept, 
and  make  the  appropriate  reference  in  the  instruction  table  which  is  using  the 
interpolation.  We  might  for  instance  be  making  up  an  instruction  table  for 
finding  values  of  Jo(x)  and  use  the  interpolation  table  in  this  way.  We 
should  then  say  that  the  interpolation  table  was  a  subsidiary  to  the  table  for 
calculating  /0(x).  There  is  thus  a  sort  of  hierarchy  of  tables.  The  interpolation 
table  might  be  regarded  as  taking  its  orders  from  the  J0  table,  and  reporting  its 
answers  back  to  it.  The  master  servant  analogy  is  however  not  a  very  good  one,  as 
there  are  many  more  masters  than  servants,  and  many  masters  have  to  share  the 
same  servants. 

Now  let  me  give  a  picture  of  the  operation  of  the  machine.  Let  us  begin  with 
some  problem  which  has  been  brought  in  by  a  customer.  It  will  first  go  to  the 
problems  preparation  section  where  it  is  examined  to  see  whether  it  is  in  a 
suitable  form  and  self-consistent,  and  a  very  rough  computing  procedure  made 


390  I  Alan  Turing 


out.  It  then  goes  to  the  tables  preparation  section.  Let  us  suppose  for  example 
that  the  problem  was  to  tabulate  solutions  of  the  equation 

/  +  xy'  =  Jo(x) 

with  initial  conditions  x  =  y  =  0,  /  =  a.  This  would  be  regarded  as  a  particular 
case  of  solving  the  equation 

/  =  F(x,y,y’) 

for  which  one  would  have  instruction  tables  already  prepared.  One  would  need 
also  a  table  to  produce  the  function  F(x,  y,  z )  (in  this  case  F(x,  y,  z )  =  Jo{x)  —  xz 
which  would  mainly  involve  a  table  to  produce  Jo{x),  and  this  we  might  expect  to 
get  off  the  shelf).  A  few  additional  details  about  the  boundary  conditions  and  the 
length  of  the  arc  would  have  to  be  dealt  with,  but  much  of  this  detail  would  also 
be  found  on  the  shelf,  just  like  the  table  for  obtaining  J0(x).  The  instructions  for 
the  job  would  therefore  consist  of  a  considerable  number  taken  off  the  shelf 
together  with  a  few  made  up  specially  for  the  job  in  question.  The  instruction 
cards  for  the  standard  processes  would  have  already  been  punched,  but  the  new 
ones  would  have  to  be  done  separately.  When  these  had  all  been  assembled  and 
checked  they  would  be  taken  to  the  input  mechanism,  which  is  simply  a 
Hollerith  card  feed.  They  would  be  put  into  the  card  hopper  and  a  button 
pressed  to  start  the  cards  moving  through.  It  must  be  remembered  that  initially 
there  are  no  instructions  in  the  machine,  and  one’s  normal  facilities  are  therefore 
not  available.  The  first  few  cards  that  pass  in  have  therefore  to  be  carefully 
thought  out  to  deal  with  this  situation.  They  are  the  initial  input  cards  and  are 
always  the  same.  When  they  have  passed  in  a  few  rather  fundamental  instruction 
tables  will  have  been  set  up  in  the  machine,  including  sufficient  to  enable  the 
machine  to  read  the  special  pack  of  cards  that  has  been  prepared  for  the  job  we 
are  doing.  When  this  has  been  done  there  are  various  possibilities  as  to  what 
happens  next,  depending  on  the  way  the  job  has  been  programmed.  The  machine 
might  have  been  made  to  go  straight  on  through,  and  carry  out  the  job, 
punching  or  printing  all  the  answers  required,  and  stopping  when  all  of  this 
has  been  done.  But  more  probably  it  will  have  been  arranged  that  the  machine 
stops  as  soon  as  the  instruction  tables  have  been  put  in.  This  allows  for  the 
possibility  of  checking  that  the  content  of  the  memories  is  correct,  and  for  a 
number  of  variations  of  procedure.  It  is  clearly  a  suitable  moment  for  a  break.  We 
might  also  make  a  number  of  other  breaks.  For  instance  we  might  be  interested 
in  certain  particular  values  of  the  parameter  a,  which  were  experimentally 
obtained  figures,  and  it  would  then  be  convenient  to  pause  after  each  parameter 
value,  and  feed  the  next  parameter  value  in  from  another  card.  Or  one  might 
prefer  to  have  the  cards  all  ready  in  the  hopper  and  let  the  ACE  take  them  in  as  it 
wanted  them.  One  can  do  as  one  wishes,  but  one  must  make  up  one’s  mind.  Each 
time  the  machine  pauses  in  this  way  a  ‘word’  or  sequence  of  32  binary  digits  is 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  391 


displayed  on  neon  bulbs.  This  word  indicates  the  reason  for  stopping.  I  have 
already  mentioned  two  possible  reasons.  A  large  class  of  further  possible  reasons 
is  provided  by  the  checks.  The  programming  should  be  done  in  such  a  way  that 
the  ACE  is  frequently  investigating  identities  which  should  be  satisfied  if  all  is  as 
it  should  be.  Whenever  one  of  these  checks  fails  the  machine  stops  and  displays  a 
word  which  describes  what  check  has  failed. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  possibilities  as  to  what  one  may  do  are  immense.  One  of 
our  difficulties  will  be  the  maintenance  of  an  appropriate  discipline,  so  that  we 
do  not  lose  track  of  what  we  are  doing.  We  shall  need  a  number  of  efficient 
librarian  types  to  keep  us  in  order. 

Finally  I  should  like  to  make  a  few  conjectures  as  to  the  repercussions  that 
electronic  digital  computing  machinery  will  have  on  mathematics.  I  have  already 
mentioned  that  the  ACE  will  do  the  work  of  about  10,000  computers.  It  is  to  be 
expected  therefore  that  large  scale  hand-computing  will  die  out.  Computers  will 
still  be  employed  on  small  calculations,  such  as  the  substitution  of  values  in 
formulae,  but  whenever  a  single  calculation  may  be  expected  to  take  a  human 
computer  days  of  work,  it  will  presumably  be  done  by  an  electronic  computer 
instead.  This  will  not  necessitate  everyone  interested  in  such  work  having  an 
electronic  computer.  It  would  be  quite  possible  to  arrange  to  control  a  distant 
computer  by  means  of  a  telephone  line.  Special  input  and  output  machinery 
would  be  developed  for  use  at  these  out  stations,  and  would  cost  a  few  hundred 
pounds  at  most.  The  main  bulk  of  the  work  done  by  these  computers  will 
however  consist  of  problems  which  could  not  have  been  tackled  by  hand 
computing  because  of  the  scale  of  the  undertaking.  In  order  to  supply  the 
machine  with  these  problems  we  shall  need  a  great  number  of  mathematicians 
of  ability.  These  mathematicians  will  be  needed  in  order  to  do  the  preliminary 
research  on  the  problems,  putting  them  into  a  form  for  computation.  There  will 
be  considerable  scope  for  analysts.  When  a  human  computer  is  working  on  a 
problem  he  can  usually  apply  some  common  sense  to  give  him  an  idea  of  how 
accurate  his  answers  are.  With  a  digital  computer  we  can  no  longer  rely  on 
common  sense,  and  the  bounds  of  error  must  be  based  on  some  proved  inequal¬ 
ities.  We  need  analysts  to  find  the  appropriate  inequalities  for  us.  The  inequalities 
need  not  always  be  explicit,  i.e.  one  need  not  have  them  in  such  a  form  that  we 
can  tell,  before  the  calculation  starts,  and  using  only  pencil  and  paper,  how  big 
the  error  will  be.  The  error  calculation  may  be  a  serious  part  of  the  ACE’s  duties. 
To  an  extent  it  may  be  possible  to  replace  the  estimates  of  error  by  statistical 
estimates  obtained  by  repeating  the  job  several  times,  and  doing  the  rounding  off 
differently  each  time,  controlling  it  by  some  random  element,  some  electronic 
roulette  wheel.  Such  statistical  estimates  however  leave  much  in  doubt,  are 
wasteful  in  machine  time,  and  give  no  indication  of  what  can  be  done  if  it 
turns  out  that  the  errors  are  intolerably  large.  The  statistical  method  can  only 
help  the  analyst,  not  replace  him. 


392  I  Alan  Turing 


Analysis  is  just  one  of  the  purposes  for  which  we  shall  need  good  mathemat¬ 
icians.  Roughly  speaking  those  who  work  in  connection  with  the  ACE  will  be 
divided  into  its  masters  and  its  servants.  Its  masters  will  plan  out  instruction 
tables  for  it,  thinking  up  deeper  and  deeper  ways  of  using  it.  Its  servants  will  feed 
it  with  cards  as  it  calls  for  them.  They  will  put  right  any  parts  that  go  wrong. 
They  will  assemble  data  that  it  requires.  In  fact  the  servants  will  take  the  place  of 
limbs.  As  time  goes  on  the  calculator  itself  will  take  over  the  functions  both  of 
masters  and  of  servants.  The  servants  will  be  replaced  by  mechanical  and 
electrical  limbs  and  sense  organs.  One  might  for  instance  provide  curve  followers 
to  enable  data  to  be  taken  direct  from  curves  instead  of  having  girls  read  off 
values  and  punch  them  on  cards.  The  masters  are  liable  to  get  replaced  because  as 
soon  as  any  technique  becomes  at  all  stereotyped  it  becomes  possible  to  devise  a 
system  of  instruction  tables  which  will  enable  the  electronic  computer  to  do  it  for 
itself.  It  may  happen  however  that  the  masters  will  refuse  to  do  this.  They  may  be 
unwilling  to  let  their  jobs  be  stolen  from  them  in  this  way.  In  that  case  they 
would  surround  the  whole  of  their  work  with  mystery  and  make  excuses, 
couched  in  well  chosen  gibberish,  whenever  any  dangerous  suggestions  were 
made.  I  think  that  a  reaction  of  this  kind  is  a  very  real  danger.  This  topic 
naturally  leads  to  the  question  as  to  how  far  it  is  possible  in  principle  for  a 
computing  machine  to  simulate  human  activities.  I  will  return  to  this  later,  when 
I  have  discussed  the  effects  of  these  machines  on  mathematics  a  little  further. 

I  expect  that  digital  computing  machines  will  eventually  stimulate  a  consider¬ 
able  interest  in  symbolic  logic  and  mathematical  philosophy.  The  language  in 
which  one  communicates  with  these  machines,  i.e.  the  language  of  instruction 
tables,  forms  a  sort  of  symbolic  logic.  The  machine  interprets  whatever  it  is  told 
in  a  quite  definite  manner  without  any  sense  of  humour  or  sense  of  proportion. 
Unless  in  communicating  with  it  one  says  exactly  what  one  means,  trouble  is 
bound  to  result.  Actually  one  could  communicate  with  these  machines  in  any 
language  provided  it  was  an  exact  language,  i.e.  in  principle  one  should  be  able  to 
communicate  in  any  symbolic  logic,  provided  that  the  machine  were  given 
instruction  tables  which  would  enable  it  to  interpret  that  logical  system.  This 
should  mean  that  there  will  be  much  more  practical  scope  for  logical  systems 
than  there  has  been  in  the  past.  Some  attempts  will  probably  be  made  to  get  the 
machines  to  do  actual  manipulations  of  mathematical  formulae.  To  do  so  will 
require  the  development  of  a  special  logical  system  for  the  purpose.  This  system 
should  resemble  normal  mathematical  procedure  closely,  but  at  the  same  time 
should  be  as  unambiguous  as  possible.  As  regards  mathematical  philosophy, 
since  the  machines  will  be  doing  more  and  more  mathematics  themselves,  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  human  interest  will  be  driven  further  and  further  into 
philosophical  questions  of  what  can  in  principle  be  done  etc. 

It  has  been  said  that  computing  machines  can  only  carry  out  the  processes  that 
they  are  instructed  to  do.  This  is  certainly  true  in  the  sense  that  if  they  do 


Lecture  on  the  Automatic  Computing  Engine  I  393 


something  other  than  what  they  were  instructed  then  they  have  just  made  some 
mistake.  It  is  also  true  that  the  intention  in  constructing  these  machines  in  the 
first  instance  is  to  treat  them  as  slaves,  giving  them  only  jobs  which  have  been 
thought  out  in  detail,  jobs  such  that  the  user  of  the  machine  fully  understands 
what  in  principle  is  going  on  all  the  time.  Up  till  the  present  machines  have  only 
been  used  in  this  way.  But  is  it  necessary  that  they  should  always  be  used  in  such 
a  manner?  Let  us  suppose  we  have  set  up  a  machine  with  certain  initial  instruc¬ 
tion  tables,  so  constructed  that  these  tables  might  on  occasion,  if  good  reason 
arose,  modify  those  tables.  One  can  imagine  that  after  the  machine  had  been 
operating  for  some  time,  the  instructions  would  have  altered  out  of  all  recogni¬ 
tion,  but  nevertheless  still  be  such  that  one  would  have  to  admit  that  the  machine 
was  still  doing  very  worthwhile  calculations.  Possibly  it  might  still  be  getting 
results  of  the  type  desired  when  the  machine  was  first  set  up,  but  in  a  much  more 
efficient  manner.  In  such  a  case  one  would  have  to  admit  that  the  progress  of  the 
machine  had  not  been  foreseen  when  its  original  instructions  were  put  in.  It 
would  be  like  a  pupil  who  had  learnt  much  from  his  master,  but  had  added  much 
more  by  his  own  work.  When  this  happens  I  feel  that  one  is  obliged  to  regard 
the  machine  as  showing  intelligence.  As  soon  as  one  can  provide  a  reasonably 
large  memory  capacity  it  should  be  possible  to  begin  to  experiment  on  these 
lines.  The  memory  capacity  of  the  human  brain  is  probably  of  the  order  of  ten 
thousand  million  binary  digits.  But  most  of  this  is  probably  used  in  remembering 
visual  impressions,  and  other  comparatively  wasteful  ways.  One  might  reason¬ 
ably  hope  to  be  able  to  make  some  real  progress  with  a  few  million  digits, 
especially  if  one  confined  one’s  investigations  to  some  rather  limited  field  such 
as  the  game  of  chess.  It  would  probably  be  quite  easy  to  find  instruction  tables 
which  would  enable  the  ACE  to  win  against  an  average  player.  Indeed  Shannon  of 
Bell  Telephone  laboratories  tells  me  that  he  has  won  games  playing  by  rule  of 
thumb:  the  skill  of  his  opponents  is  not  stated.  But  I  would  not  consider  such  a 
victory  very  significant.  What  we  want  is  a  machine  that  can  learn  from  experi¬ 
ence.  The  possibility  of  letting  the  machine  alter  its  own  instructions  provides  the 
mechanism  for  this,  but  this  of  course  does  not  get  us  very  far. 

It  might  be  argued  that  there  is  a  fundamental  contradiction  in  the  idea  of  a 
machine  with  intelligence.  It  is  certainly  true  that  ‘acting  like  a  machine’  has 
become  synonymous  with  lack  of  adaptability.  But  the  reason  for  this  is  obvious. 
Machines  in  the  past  have  had  very  little  storage,  and  there  has  been  no  question 
of  the  machine  having  any  discretion.  The  argument  might  however  be  put  into  a 
more  aggressive  form.  It  has  for  instance  been  shown  that  with  certain  logical 
systems  there  can  be  no  machine  which  will  distinguish  provable  formulae  of  the 
system  from  unprovable,  i.e.  that  there  is  no  test  that  the  machine  can  apply 
which  will  divide  propositions  with  certainty  into  these  two  classes.  Thus  if  a 
machine  is  made  for  this  purpose  it  must  in  some  cases  fail  to  give  an  answer.  On 
the  other  hand  if  a  mathematician  is  confronted  with  such  a  problem  he  would 


394  I  Alan  Turing 


search  around  a[nd]  find  new  methods  of  proof,  so  that  he  ought  eventually  to 
be  able  to  reach  a  decision  about  any  given  formula.  This  would  be  the  argument. 
Against  it  I  would  say  that  fair  play  must  be  given  to  the  machine.  Instead  of  it 
sometimes  giving  no  answer  we  could  arrange  that  it  gives  occasional  wrong 
answers.  But  the  human  mathematician  would  likewise  make  blunders  when 
trying  out  new  techniques.  It  is  easy  for  us  to  regard  these  blunders  as  not 
counting  and  give  him  another  chance,  but  the  machine  would  probably  be 
allowed  no  mercy.  In  other  words  then,  if  a  machine  is  expected  to  be  infallible,  it 
cannot  also  be  intelligent.  There  are  several  mathematical  theorems  which  say 
almost  exactly  that.  But  these  theorems  say  nothing  about  how  much  intelligence 
may  be  displayed  if  a  machine  makes  no  pretence  at  infallibility.  To  continue  my 
plea  for  ‘fair  play  for  the  machines’  when  testing  their  I.Q.  A  human  mathemat¬ 
ician  has  always  undergone  an  extensive  training.  This  training  may  be  regarded 
as  not  unlike  putting  instruction  tables  into  a  machine.  One  must  therefore  not 
expect  a  machine  to  do  a  very  great  deal  of  building  up  of  instruction  tables  on 
its  own.  No  man  adds  very  much  to  the  body  of  knowledge,  why  should  we 
expect  more  of  a  machine?  Putting  the  same  point  differently,  the  machine  must 
be  allowed  to  have  contact  with  human  beings  in  order  that  it  may  adapt  itself  to 
their  standards.  The  game  of  chess  may  perhaps  be  rather  suitable  for  this 
purpose,  as  the  moves  of  the  machine’s  opponent  will  automatically  provide 
this  contact.